The Project Gutenberg eBook of The eyes of innocence
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The eyes of innocence

Author: Maurice Leblanc

Illustrator: George W. Gage

Translator: Alexander Teixeira de Mattos

Release date: May 21, 2024 [eBook #73662]
                Most recently updated: August 31, 2024

Language: English

Original publication: New York: The MacAuley Company, 1920

Credits: Peter Becker, Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EYES OF INNOCENCE ***
 



 THE EYES OF INNOCENCE

          [Illustration: There was a faint sound behind her.

                              (Page 159)]




                                  THE
                           EYES OF INNOCENCE

                                  BY
                            MAURICE LEBLANC

           Author of “Arsène Lupin,” “The Golden Triangle,”
                     “The Woman of Mystery,” “The
                        Secret of Sarek,” etc.

                             TRANSLATED BY
                     ALEXANDER TEIXEIRA DE MATTOS

                               NEW YORK
                         THE MACAULAY COMPANY
                                 1920




                          Copyright, 1920, by
                         THE MACAULAY COMPANY

                        PRINTED IN THE U. S. A.




CONTENTS


CHAPTER                                                             PAGE

I GILBERTE                                                            11

II THE SOLITARY                                                       24

III THE UNKNOWN                                                       39

IV AN EVENING AT MME. DE LA VAUDRAYE’S                                52

V THE SUITORS                                                         68

VI A NEW FRIEND                                                       85

VII GILBERTE’S TWO FRIENDS                                           103

VIII THE APPOINTMENT                                                 119

IX AFFIANCED                                                         137

X THE DESERTED HOUSE                                                 150

XI GILBERTE’S NAME                                                   165




THE EYES OF INNOCENCE




I

GILBERTE


“Would you please give your name, madam?” asked the waiter.

And he handed the elder of the two travellers a sheet of paper headed,
“_Villa-pension des Deux Mondes, Dieppe_.”

“Write down the name, Gilberte,” she said. “I am so tired.”

Gilberte took the pen and wrote:

“Mme. Armand and daughter, from London, bound for.... Now that I think
of it, where are we going next, mother?”

“I don’t know yet.”

“Oh, that doesn’t matter!” said the waiter.

And he took the paper and left the room.

“Yes, Mr. Waiter,” cried the young girl, with a laugh. “Mme. Armand and
her daughter, arriving from England, from Germany, from Russia, coming
to France and delighted, especially Mlle. Armand, who does not yet know
her own country!”

“Will you find happiness here?” murmured her mother, sadly, drawing her
daughter to her. “There is none left for me, since your poor father is
dead; but you, my pet, my dear, loving Gilberte, what has the future in
store for you?”

“Why, joys, mother darling, nothing but the greatest joys: haven’t I you
with me?”

They exchanged a long embrace. Then Mme. Armand said:

“Gilberte, the crossing has upset me; I feel I must lie down for a
while. Go and sit on the terrace and come back in an hour. Then we will
unpack our trunks and go to the post-office.”

“Are you expecting a letter?”

“Yes.”

“From whom?”

“How inquisitive you are!”

“Oh, mummy, you’re always saying that! But are you sure that it’s not
you who are a little--what shall I say--mysterious? You never answer
even my simplest questions.”

“I shall answer them one day, child, but not before I have to ... not
before I have to.”

Gilberte saw her mother’s face wrung with such anguish that she was
silent and fondly kissed her hand. Mme. Armand went on:

“Yes, you are right. I am a little mysterious, very mysterious even; but
if you only know how it hurts me to be so! Still, I will answer you this
time, dear: the letter I am expecting is from your nurse.”

“From my nurse? Then I was brought up in France? But where?”

Mme. Armand was silent. Gilberte waited a few moments, then put on her
hat and cloak and said:

“Go and lie down, mother. You poor dear, you look as you do on your bad
days.... There, I’ll leave you in peace.”

“You won’t go out, will you, dear?”

“Go out? I, who have never left your side? Why, I should be afraid to
walk down the street all by myself! I shall be back soon, dearest.”

She opened the door and went downstairs. Above the reception-rooms,
which occupied a wing consisting of a single floor, to the right of the
garden, was a terrace covered with tents and wicker chairs. She sat down
there.

It was a mild and balmy October day. The wide, deserted beach was bright
with sunshine. The sea was very calm and edged with a narrow fringe of
foam.

An hour passed.

“I will go in,” she said, “when that little boat disappears behind the
jetty.”

The boat disappeared and she rose to her feet. As she went up the
stairs, a childish idea came into her head, an idea which she was
destined long to remember, together with the smallest details of that
terrible minute:

“If mother is still asleep,” she thought, “I will blow on her forehead
to wake her.”

She listened at the door. Not a sound. She laughed roguishly. Then,
slowly, cautiously, she opened the door. Mme. Armand lay stretched on
the bed. Gilberte went up to her. For some indefinable reason, she
forgot her intended joke and simply kissed her mother on the forehead.

A cry escaped her lips. Terror-stricken, she flung herself upon her
mother, caught her desperately in her arms and fell fainting beside the
bed.

Mme. Armand was dead.

       *       *       *       *       *

A room in which she sobs for hours on end, heedless of all things,
huddled in a little chair, or on her knees before a white-curtained bed;
people who come and go; a doctor who certifies the cause of death;
aneurism of the heart, beyond a doubt; the lady of the house, who tries
to comfort her; a commissary of police who puts questions which she is
unable to answer and who makes her look in her mother’s trunks for
papers that are not there: these are Gilberte’s lasting memories of
those two dreadful days.

Then came the singing in the church, a long road between bare,
wind-stripped trees, the graveyard and the final and irrevocable parting
from her who, until now, was all her life, her soul, her light....

Oh, the first night spent in solitude and those first meals taken with
no one opposite her and those long interminable days during which she
never stopped weeping the big tears that come welling up from the heart
as from a spring which nothing can dry up! Alone, knowing nobody, what
was she to do? Where could she go? To whom could she turn?

“The important thing,” insisted the lady of the house, who sometimes
came to see her in her room, “the most important thing is that you
should have a solicitor. Mine is prepared to come whenever you please. I
spoke to him about you; and it seems that there are formalities.
Remember what the commissary said about the papers....”

Gilberte remembered nothing, for she had listened to nothing.
Nevertheless, the persistency of this advice, repeated daily and with
such conviction, ended by persuading her; and, one morning, she sent to
ask Maître Dufornéril to be good enough to call on her.

Maître Dufornéril had one of those placid and good-natured faces the
sight of which seems to soothe you at once. He gave the impression of
attaching so much importance to the business in hand that it would have
been impossible not to take at least some interest in it one’s self.
Gilberte, therefore, was obliged to reflect, to tax her memory, in
short, to reply.

“From what I have learnt, mademoiselle, it is evident that no papers
have been found enabling us to establish your mother’s identity and
your own. The commissary, however, told me of an envelope containing
securities which he advised you to lock up carefully. Is it still in
your possession?”

“I don’t know.... Mother never told me.... Is this what you mean?” she
asked.

The solicitor took two fat, leather portfolios from the mantelpiece and
opened them. He was astounded at what he saw:

“And do you leave this lying about?... Bonds payable to bearer?”

Gilberte blushed, feeling as if she had committed some enormous crime.
He counted the sheets, made a rapid addition and said:

“You are very well off, mademoiselle.”

“Really?” she said, absent-mindedly. “Yes ... mother said something....”

After a peace during which he watched her with increasing surprise, he
asked:

“And have you your mother’s papers, your father’s papers?”

“What papers?”

“Why, their birth-certificates, your own, their marriage-certificate, in
fact, everything that established their position and now establishes
yours.”

“I haven’t them.”

“But they must be somewhere.... Can you give me no clue as to where they
are?”

“No.... But I seem to remember once hearing them talk of papers that had
been lost ... or rather burnt in a fire ... or else ... in fact, I can’t
say for certain.” ...

“Come, come!” cried Maître Dufornéril. “We are on the wrong track
altogether! Let us start from the beginning. Where were you born?”

“I don’t know.”

“How do you mean, you don’t know?”

“Mother would never tell me exactly.”

“But where was she born? And your father?”

“I don’t know that either.”

The solicitor looked up. Was she laughing at him? But, at the sight of
her sad face and candid eyes, he was silent for a moment and then went
on:

“You have come from London?”

“Yes.”

“Did you have friends over there, acquaintances?”

“No, we lived quite alone.”

“Never mind: if you give me the address of the house you lived in, we
shall easily find traces of Mme. Armand.”

“Mother was not called Mme. Armand in London; she was called Aubert.”

“But Armand is your real name?”

“I don’t think so. At Liverpool, where we lived for three years and
where father died, last year, after making such a lot of money, we were
known by the name of Killner. Before that, at Berlin, it was Dumas....
And, at Moscow.” ...

“You don’t know the reason why your parents used to change their name
like that?”

“No, I do not.”

“You saw nothing in your parents’ character to explain it?”

“No, nothing.”

“Were they on good terms?”

“Oh, yes! They were so fond of each other! And mother was so happy!”

So happy! How positively Gilberte was able to say that! Happy indeed
beside her husband, under his eyes, with her hand in his. But why was
she so often caught crying? Why those hours of gloomy melancholy, of
inexplicable depression? Why had she one day drawn her daughter to her,
stammering:

“Ah, my child; my child! Never do anything that you have to hide: it is
too painful!”

Gilberte was on the point of speaking. A vague sense of shame prevented
her. Besides, Maître Dufornéril, who had taken down a few notes in his
pocket-book, was beginning again:

“Give me all the particulars that can help us, mademoiselle. The
smallest details are of importance.”

She mentioned the towns in which they had lived: Vienna, Trieste, Milan,
with their memories of a secluded life, easy of late, but so hard and
difficult at first; and then, further back, Barcelona, where they had
been very unhappy; and then came memories, more and more indistinct, of
poverty, hunger, cold....

“We shall find out, mademoiselle,” declared the solicitor. “It won’t be
an easy business, for we have to do with a combination of abnormal
circumstances which baffle me a little, I admit. But, after all, it is
inconceivable that we should not find out. You have to know, you must
know who you are and what name you are entitled to bear. Will you trust
your interests to me?”

“Yes.”

“Well, first of all, you must leave this bundle of securities in my
hands: I will give you a receipt for it. I will cash the coupons as they
fall due and send you the proceeds when you need money. Where were you
going with your mother?”

“She was expecting a letter.”

“A letter? That is one clue.”

“But the letter was addressed to the _pôste restante_; and I don’t know
in what name or initials.”

“True.... Then what do you intend to do?”

“I intend to go somewhere at random. I have heard mother speak of
Chartres, Saumer, Domfront. I shall choose one of those towns, the
quietest ... no matter where ... as long as I can weep undisturbed.”

“Poor child!” murmured Maître Dufornéril.




II

THE SOLITARY


“Of the fortress built, in 1011, by Guillaume de Bellême, on the summit
of the rock at Domfront, at 300 feet above the little River Varenne, all
that is now left standing is two great strips of wall, flanked by
picturesque buttresses and pierced with wide arches, the remains of the
ancient keep. Round about are a few traces of ramparts and remnants of
underground passages, all arranged in the form of a square and in a
perfect state of preservation.”

The guide-books, however, for some reason, fail to mention the
manor-house built, in the seventeenth century, by Pierre de Donnadieu,
Governor of Anjou, on the site and with the materials of the
outbuildings of the old fortress. The _logis_, as this sort of dwelling
is called in Lower Normandy, is intact and wholly charming. Four
slender, tapering turrets grace the corners. An enormous roof, decked
with two monumental chimneys, seems to top it with a fool’s cap, too
large for its little granite forehead lined with two rows of bricks. The
entrance is through the square, but the main front overlooks the
precipice and a garden staggers down the steep slope to the river that
winds through the pretty Valdes Rochers.

Fourteen years earlier, M. and Mme. de la Vaudraye, one of the leading
families of the neighborhood, had ruined themselves in unfortunate
speculations. M. de la Vaudraye died of grief and shame. His widow, in
order to pay for the education of her ten-year-old son, let the
manor-house, which formed part of her dowry and which had been in the
possession of her family for nearly two hundred years. It was taken, for
a time, by one of the garrison officers, but was now once more
untenanted.

Here Gilberte sought refuge like a poor wounded animal. The very
sleepiness of Domfront had attracted her, its look as of some vanquished
city, wearied of a valorous past and taking its just and honourable
repose. Strolling through the ruins, she saw, on the door of the Logis,
a notice, “TO LET.” She went in search of the owner.

Mme. de la Vaudraye, a tall, thin, hard-eyed woman, expressed herself in
affected sentences of which her lips formed the syllables carefully, one
by one, as though they were things of price that must be carried to the
highest pitch of perfection.

“I can see from your attitude, madame,” she said, “that you have been
struck by the unimpeachable condition of my house. Woodwork, mirrors,
curtains, furniture: everything is in perfect repair. And yet the Logis
is one of the most historic abodes in the district.” ...

Gilberte was no longer listening. She had been called, “Madame.” It had
seemed natural then to address her like that? If so, could she pass as
married, in spite of her age? The thought surprised her. And yet, she
reflected, how could any one suppose that a young girl would come by
herself to treat for the manor-house and live in it by herself?

She remembered a piece of advice which the solicitor had given her:

“If you wish to lead a quiet life, not a word about the past before we
have shed a full light upon it.”

Yes, but how much easier it would be to veil the past under that name of
“madame”! And how much better that title would protect her! As a girl,
living alone, she must needs be the object of curiosity, the victim of
any amount of gossip. As a married woman, she would be in a normal
position; her solitary existence would cause no surprise; she could keep
off intruders, go about as she pleased, or stay indoors and weep, with
none to spy upon the secret of her tears.

“In what name shall I make out the agreement?” asked Mme. de la
Vaudraye, when everything was settled: settled to the great advantage of
the owner, who had increased her rent by one-half.

“Why, in my own name: Mme. Armand!” said Gilberte, without foreseeing
the consequences which this decision involved.

Mme. de la Vaudraye hesitated:

“But ... perhaps we shall want ... M. Armand’s signature.” ...

“I am a widow.”

“Oh, I beg your pardon! I ought to have known. I see you are in
mourning.” ...

Mme. Armand moved into the Logis that same evening. At Mme. de la
Vaudraye’s express recommendation, she engaged as a servant the wife of
the keeper of the ruins, Adèle, a big, fat, talkative woman, with hair
on her upper lip, a stealthy eye and quick, blunt manners. Bouquetot,
her husband, was to sleep at the manor-house; and their son, Antoine,
who had just left his regiment, would do the heavy work and attend to
the garden.

       *       *       *       *       *

And life began, the hard, cruel, despairing life of those who have no
one to love them and no one whom they can love.

There was no consolation for Gilberte, after her mother’s death. What
saved her was the necessity to act, to act continually, to make
decisions, to give orders, in short, to exercise her will. She had to
shake off her natural inclination for dreaming and listlessness, to
break herself of the passive habits due to the existence which she had
led till then. Things went so badly at the manor-house until she
realized the task that lay before her, the domestic duties were so
irregularly performed, there was so much fuss and disorder, that she was
compelled to look after her own housekeeping.

She found it difficult indeed to word the first reprimand:

“Adèle, I do wish you would serve lunch punctually!”

And she added, immediately:

“Of course, I mean, when possible.”

As ill-luck would have it, it was not “possible” for three days running;
and Gilberte had to resolve to speak seriously. On the fourth day, she
went down to the kitchen, very quickly, so as not to let her indignation
cool on the stairs:

“Adèle! It’s one o’clock and”....

“Well, what of it?” the fat woman broke in.

Gilberte stopped short, hesitated, blushed and stammered:

“I should so much like to have luncheon served at half-past twelve
exactly!”

From that day forward, the meals were punctually prepared.

Her victory gave her self-assurance. She had the accounts brought to her
daily, although her inspection was confined to ascertaining the cost of
things and checking the additions.

With Gilberte’s affection and open nature, however, it was difficult for
her to live absolutely cut off from her fellow-creatures, as she had
first intended. True, she refused to make acquaintances; and her shyness
was such that, after three months, she had not yet set foot in the
streets of Domfront. But those who have been stricken by fate have a
natural company of friends in the poor, the wretched, the destitute, the
outcast; and her heart could not avoid the sort of friendship built upon
adversity.

Between Gilberte and the first beggar who crossed the threshold of the
Logis there was more than an alms and a thank-you: there was the delight
of giving on one side and, on the other, gratitude for the smile and the
good grace of her who gave. Nor could it be otherwise. Even if Gilberte
had not had that pretty, fair hair which frolicked around her face like
little flickering flames, nor those gentle lips, nor those pink cheeks
which gave her face the freshness of a flower, she would still have been
bewitchingly beautiful, thanks to her blue eyes, which were always a
little dewy, as though tears were playing in them, and always smiling,
even at the times of her deepest sadness. And her look, her figure, all
her delicate and attractive personality breathed such touching purity
that the most indifferent were lapped in it as in the soft caresses of a
balmy breeze.

Her charm was made up of goodness, simplicity and, above all, innocence,
that innocence which is unaware of its own existence, which knows
nothing of life, which suspects no evil and which does not see the traps
laid for it, nor the hypocrisy that surrounds it, nor the envy which it
inspires.

_La Bonne Demoiselle_ was the name by which the poor called her, thus
correcting, by a sort of common instinct, the style which circumstances
had compelled her to adopt. And, in all the garrets of Domfront, in all
the cabins and cottages of the neighbourhood, people spoke of _la Bonne
Demoiselle_ of the Logis, of _la Bonne Demoiselle_ who mourned her
husband’s memory and smiled upon the poor.

Her gentle smile worked many a miracle in that little world, dispelled
many a hatred, stifled many a rebellious impulse, healed many a sore.
Men and women consulted her, inexperienced girl that she was, and, what
was more, followed her advice.

A mother came one day, with her baby in her arms. She told the tragedy
of her life, spoke of an elopement, a desertion. Gilberte understood
nothing of her story. Yet the mother, in an hour, went away consoled.

Young girls came and asked her opinion about getting married; women came
and enlarged upon their domestic quarrels; others came and told her
things that bewildered her. All these problems, all these cases of
conscience Mme. Armand, _la Bonne Demoiselle_, solved with her
innocence, the innocence of a child that, knowing nothing, knows more
than they who know everything.

One evening, Adèle brought her housekeeping-book. Gilberte gravely added
the column and initialed it.

“But madame is not even looking to see what I bought and how much I
paid.”

Gilberte blushed:

“You see.... I don’t know much about it.... So I leave it to you....
Besides, I have no reason to suspect you....”

There must have been something in the tone of her words, something
special in her air and attitude; at any rate, the old woman was seized
with extraordinary excitement, and, flinging herself on her knees before
her mistress, cried:

“Oh, it’s a shame to cheat a person like you, ma’am! I can have no heart
at all, nor my great rascal of a Bouquetot either!... Why, you must be
an angel from Heaven not to see that everybody’s robbing you: the
grocer, the baker, the butcher, and I most of all!... Just look at my
book: a bunch of carrots, thirty sous; a wretched chicken, six francs
fifteen sous....”

She emptied her purse on the table:

“There! Fifty or sixty francs I’ve done you out of, all in one month!...
But I stopped the other day, I couldn’t do it, it broke my heart to see
you like that, so trusting....”

“My poor Adèle,” whispered Gilberte, greatly moved.

“And then ... and then,” continued the woman, in a low voice, with bent
head, “I have something else to confess.... But I dare not: it’s so
shameful.... Listen.... Mme. de la Vaudraye ... well, she put me here to
tell her all about you: what you did; if you received any letters; if
you talked to gentlemen.... And, in the morning, when I went to do my
shopping, I used to go to her ... and tell her what I saw.... Oh, there
was nothing wrong to tell, for you are a real saint!... But, all the
same.... Forgive me!”

The old servant’s confusion was touching. Gilberte gently raised her
from the floor and said:

“There, we’ll say no more about it. But why is Mme. de la Vaudraye
interested in me and my doings?”

“Goodness knows! She’s always poking her nose in everywhere and wants to
manage everything at Domfront and every one to obey her. And you don’t
know how they talk about you here! There’s no lack of gossip, I can tell
you!”

“About me?”

“Yes. They want to know where you come from, who M. Armand was, all
sorts of things! Then Mme. de la Vaudraye speechifies about you in her
drawing-room. Just think, you’re her tenant; and she’s the only one who
has spoken to you!... And then I’ve guessed something else....”

“What’s that, Adèle?”

“Well, you are rich and a widow; I’m sure she’s after you as a
daughter-in-law.... That I’d take my oath on!... Oh, she has her head
screwed on her shoulders! A fine lady like you for her penniless beggar
of a son, a good-for-nothing who can’t put his hand to anything!...”

Gilberte listened to her in utter confusion. Wasn’t it possible to
remain hidden and unknown? Were there really people who spied on others,
who tried to fathom the mystery of their lives and actually plotted
against them?

But Adèle said, in a big, fond voice:

“Don’t you worry yourself, _ma Bonne Demoiselle_. I’m here and I’ll look
after you and look after your money. Oh, the grocer and the butcher and
the rest had best mind what they’re about!... You let me be: you won’t
be overcharged any more.... And then Bouquetot is there and my son
Antoine: they’re decent fellows both ... and fell in love with you at
once ... because ... because there’s something different about you ...
something that makes people love you ... in spite of themselves ...
with all their hearts....”




III

THE UNKNOWN


Every day, when her household duties were done, Gilberte walked in her
garden. This was her hour of recreation. But a sweeter hour followed,
which she allotted to dreaming.

High up, on the left, on a jutting promontory, was a clearing where
stood the ruins of a little summer-house. The view from here extended,
over undulating plains, to the dark heights of Mortain. On the right,
the other side of the valley was a wall of red rocks, clad in broom and
fir-trees. It was a landscape of illimitable distances and, at the same
time, tender and familiar through the homeliness of this little glen, a
landscape which had all the wild and rugged poetry of a Breton moor....

The daylight waned early in those winter months. Gilberte waited until
the veil of night smothered its last glimmers. Sometimes, the sun’s
reflections would linger on the motionless clouds. Then the darkness
seemed to come from every side, to rise from the river, to fall from the
overcast sky, to ooze from the earth in thick mists. Then Gilberte would
go indoors.

But, one evening, at that murky moment of twilight, she saw, on the
opposite slope, a human form issuing from a hollow among the rocks and
vanishing behind a tree.

She would hardly have paid attention to it, if, on the next day, when
her eyes turned in that direction on returning from her walk, she had
not perceived, in the same place, the same form as on the day before: a
man’s figure, obviously, but so well hidden that it was impossible for
her to distinguish the least detail of his face or dress.

On the day after that, he was not there; but he was there on the
following day and almost every day afterwards.

Gilberte soon noticed that he slipped through the fir-trees a little
before her arrival and went away soon after she was gone.

Then was he there for her? She did not ask herself this question, but,
all unwittingly, she was pleased at the fact that some one was there,
dreaming doubtless like herself, some one whom she did not know, who was
not seeking to know her and of whom she thought only as an invisible
companion, a more or less real ghost, a freak of her imagination. She
had not the least curiosity concerning others and would never have
supposed that any one could have the least curiosity concerning her. He
was there for the same reasons that brought her there, because it is
good to see night blend with day and because that twilight hour is full
of charm and peace.

And so she had a friend, a distant and inaccessible friend, from whom
she would have hidden herself for ever, if he had dared to show himself
or even let her see by a movement that he was there for her, but who
did not frighten her, for the sole reason that he seemed to have no
actual existence.

“Are you not afraid of catching cold, dear madame?”

It was Mme. de la Vaudraye, who took her by surprise one evening, at the
summer-house and at once continued, in her affected voice:

“I owe you a thousand apologies. The merest politeness demanded that I
should pay you a visit, but what shall I say? I have so many duties, so
many cares! I am the president of a number of charitable committees
which take up all my time. Besides, I confess, I was afraid of appearing
indiscreet. I so much dread to push myself forward! Still, I thought it
was time to try and bring some diversion into the nun’s life which you
are leading.”

“You are too kind,” said Gilberte, touched by this solicitude.

“I felt, dear madame, that your days must be so dull. Your evenings
especially must seem endless. How do you manage to fill them?”

They had returned to the Logis. A good fire warmed the boudoir in which
Gilberte liked best to sit. The lamp was lighted. There was some music
on the piano. The table was heaped with books and papers.

“You see, madame, I play and read: I read a great deal.”

“Novels, I expect!” said the visitor, with a titter. “May I look?...
What have we here? An atlas ... manuals of history ... and literature
... selected essays ... memoirs! Are you superintending somebody’s
education?”

“My own,” said Gilberte, laughing. “It has been a little neglected; and,
as I have plenty of time....”

“But many of the books are in English ... in German even....”

“I know English and German.”

“Quite a learned person! But how well you would get on with my son! He
is so studious and cultured! He writes for the Paris papers.... Not
under his own name, of course: he would never consent to commit the name
of La Vaudraye to an occupation which, after all, is only an amusement.
He quite agrees with me on that question ... as on every other.... Why
don’t you come to us one evening? We have a few friends who are pleased
to make my drawing-room their daily meeting-place.... Everybody is dying
to see you, Guillaume most of all....”

His mother’s description of young Guillaume de la Vaudraye was hardly of
a nature to charm Gilberte from her isolation. She found an excuse.

“You are making a mistake,” cried Mme. de la Vaudraye, who was irritated
by her refusal. “Good friends are a necessity: they protect you against
evil tongues.”

“Evil tongues?”

“Yes, yes, you can understand that one can’t live as you do without
attracting comment in a small town. People ask themselves--and not
without some justice, as you must admit--the reason of your voluntary
imprisonment. All the more so because, as I hear, your servant, Adèle,
keeps a silent tongue in her head; and that sets public opinion against
you. Lastly, they say....”

“What?”

“Well, they say that you are leading such a secret existence
because....”

“Because what?”

Mme. de la Vaudraye hesitated, or rather seemed to hesitate, and then
blurted out:

“Because you do not live alone.”

She rose, thinking that Gilberte must be crushed under this accusation.
But Gilberte, casting about ingenuously for what her visitor could have
meant, repeated:

“Not alone! Well, of course not, as Adèle is here, with her husband and
her son!”

“There, don’t be alarmed, child,” concluded Mme. de la Vaudraye, in a
patronizing little way. “That is only so much talk and gossip, which I
shall know how to put down, if you will help me. It only wants a small
sacrifice. For instance, I shall be making the collection at High Mass,
on Sunday: promise me to come. It’s a promise, isn’t it?” she said, as
she went away.

Gilberte would much rather have stayed quietly at home; but, as she had
been told that that was impossible, she gave up the idea:

“It seems to hurt people,” she said to herself.

And, on the Sunday morning, when the bells rang for mass, she left the
Logis for the first time.

She felt, in the crowded high-street, as though she were awaking from a
dream of peace and silence, so intense was her dislike of bustle and
noise. There were people at the windows, people at the shop-doors,
people in the church-porch; and all those people were watching her,
staring at her and whispering as she passed.

The church was a refuge, despite the crowd that filled it and despite
the excitement provoked by her presence. Every one was astounded at her
youthfulness, dazzled by her beauty. When she walked down the nave
again, a murmur of admiration rippled through the rows of worshippers.
But, when she reached the holy-water basin, an incident occurred that
delayed her for a few seconds. Three men had rushed forward. And, with
one movement, three hands were dipped into the marble basin and held out
to her. She lowered her veil and went on.

Outside the church, the crowd stood waiting for her. Gilberte hurried
along, feeling her shyness returning in the sunlight. Her one idea was
to get back to the Logis, back into the shade. But there was a
pastry-cook’s shop at the end of the high-street; she caught sight of
the window crammed with dainty custards and many-coloured cakes; and,
as she was not prepared for such a temptation, she succumbed.

Slowly and hesitatingly, she made her choice. The shop-woman did up the
parcel; Gilberte took it and moved away. But at the door she stopped,
timidly. A group of street-boys was standing outside.

There they were, with their hands in their pockets, like loafers
feasting their eyes on an unusual sight. She went out. They ran on
either side of her, making a great din with their wooden shoes. Gilberte
suffered tortures.

Suddenly, she heard cries and laughter behind her. She turned round. A
young man, whom she recognized as one of the three who offered her the
holy water, had darted into the midst of her escort and was dispersing
it with uplifted cane. She bowed her head, in sign of thanks, and
continued on her way.

An hour later, as she was finishing lunch, Adèle brought her an
enormous sheaf of flowers: roses, white lilac and camellias. A peasant
had handed them to the servant without a word of explanation.

“But I know who sent them,” said Adèle. “It can only be M. Beaufrelant.
He has the finest hot-houses in the district; he is mad on flowers.
Madame must have seen him in church: a tall, thin man, with whiskers.”

Bouquetot, Adèle’s husband, entered:

“An old woman has brought this letter for madame.”

Gilberte opened the envelope. It contained a thousand-franc note and a
few words written in a copper-plate hand on pink note-paper:

    “To Mme. Armand, for her poor.”

“A bank-note! It must be that moneybags of a M. le Hourteulx. Let me see
the hand-writing.... Yes, that’s right; I was in service with him....
Oh, my fine fellow, if you think that, because you possess hundreds and
thousands!... Not a word.... I know what’s what!”

Bouquetot said to his wife:

“I met Mme. Duval, the chair-attendant, in the town just now. She told
me that M. Beaufrelant and M. le Hourteulx were standing by the
holy-water basin in church this morning; and young Simare as well. And
then the barber told me that young Simare followed madame and drove away
the street-boys who ran after her.”

Gilberte thought for a moment and said:

“Go to Mme. de la Vaudraye, Adèle, tell her how this money and these
flowers came into my hands and ask her to oblige me by returning them to
the senders. But the poor must not be the losers; and here is another
thousand-franc note which I beg that she will distribute as she thinks
best.”

That afternoon, Gilberte remained pensive. Those two presents surprised
her. Her ignorance of social usages did not allow her to see any
indelicacy or indiscretion in the way in which they were offered; and
yet she felt that there was something that should not have been done.

“What does it mean?” she wondered, with a vague anxiety. “What do they
want with me?”

It was the outside world trying to insinuate itself into her peaceful
home, into her independent life: the world with its sordid calculations,
its intrigues, its vanities, its stealthy encroachments upon those who
seek solitude, its instinctive jealousy of those who are able to do
without it.

At nightfall, she walked to the ruined summer-house. The stranger was
there, among the rocks opposite. She recovered all her serenity. And not
for a second did the idea cross her mind that he might be one of the
three who had forced their attentions upon her.




IV

AN EVENING AT MME. DE LA VAUDRAYE’S


It would be wearisome to describe the long series of moves and
machinations, the whole comedy of affectation and pretended solicitude
which Mme. de la Vaudraye employed to induce Gilberte to come and see
her. One day, at last, Gilberte promised, on the understanding that
there would be no one there but the regular visitors to the house.

And, in the evening, Adèle, carrying a lantern and muttering between her
teeth, accompanied her through the deserted streets.

It was a very modest house that was occupied by her who remained the
first lady of Domfront despite her shattered fortunes. No show, no
comfort, hardly room for the mother and son; but there was a _salon_, a
sumptuous _salon_, a _salon_, to which everything had been sacrificed, a
_salon_ that enabled Mme. de la Vaudraye to declare, with pride:

“I have a _salon_.”

And the townspeople nodded their heads in chorus:

“Mme. de la Vaudraye has a _salon_.”

In so saying, they had in mind not only the costly furniture heaped up
in that one room, but also the shining lights of the town who adorned it
with their presence. You were really nobody at Domfront if you did not
form part of the _salon_ of Mme. de la Vaudraye.

In its essence and as Gilberte saw it, the _salon_ consisted of an
old-oak chest and an Empire sideboard, of the Bottentuit and Charmeron
couples and their five young ladies, of M. and Mme. Lartiste and their
son, of Mlle. du Bocage, of M. Beaufrelant, M. Hourteulx and Messrs.
Simare, father and son, of a Louis XV clock, of a lacquered glass-case,
and of a set of chairs and armchairs upholstered in crimson silk.

A great silence, composed of eager curiosity, admiration and envy,
greeted Gilberte’s entrance. The hostess at once made the introductions,
or rather chiselled them out in elaborate phrases. Gilberte bowed.

“And my son? Where is my dear Guillaume?”

He was extracted from a small side-room.

“Dear Mme. Armand, here is my Guillaume, who is so anxious to make your
acquaintance.”

Guillaume de la Vaudraye was not at all bad-looking, with a very good
figure; but he had a sullen expression and his manners seemed
constrained. He gave a bow and vanished.

There was an attempt at general conversation, which fell very flat.
People exchanged distressful looks and dared not raise their voices.
Gilberte did not utter a word.

Then, to break the ice, a rush was made for the principal person
present, the last resource of drawing-rooms. He always lords it in the
place of honour, displaying the expansive smile of his large yellow
teeth. He looks like a squatting Hindu idol; he is well-groomed, shiny
and pretentious. He is the centre of social life, the ever-ready
rescuer, the life and soul of the company, the master of ceremonies, the
master of the revels, the vanisher of intolerable silence. And none can
contest his supremacy, for he alone is capable of making so much noise
without becoming exhausted and of making more noise by himself than all
the rest put together. The specimen in Mme. de la Vaudraye’s
drawing-room was signed, “PLEYEL.”

It was as though the parts had been allotted beforehand. Two groups were
formed: the audience and the performers. Gilberte found herself seated
between Mme. Charmeron, who was famed for her persistent dumbness and
distinction, and M. Simare junior, the best-dressed and most dissipated
young man in the town. He went twice a year to Paris and was looked upon
as a master of wit and satire. As a matter of fact, he started chaffing
at once:

“Ah, the overture of _The Bronze Horse_ by a Demoiselle Charmeron and a
Demoiselle Bottentuit! That’s the invariable first piece here. Ten years
ago, it seems, it was played by Mme. Bottentuit and her sister, Mme.
Charmeron; to-day, their heiresses are following in their footsteps.
Observe how beautifully the two young ladies hold themselves. Their
ambition is to realize the back view of a pair of sticks. They practise
it for four hours every morning....”

When the last chords had been banged out, he continued:

“Now, the little Charmeron girl will move off on the right, taking her
stool with her, and the little Bottentuit girl will slide to the middle
of the key-board. From the performer that she was she will become the
accompanist of papa. There, what did I tell you? It’s all settled
beforehand! Look out! Maître Bottentuit, the attorney, the drawing-room
howler, is going off, going off, I say.... I defy you to make out a word
he sings.... People have been trying for ten years; and no one has ever
succeeded.... Excuse me ... got to stop ... can’t hear myself talk ...
the wretch is bawling too loud....”

After Maître Bottentuit, Mlle. du Bocage--a little old maid whose mouth
opened so wide that you could have dived down her throat--struck up the
duet in _Mireille_, supported by M. Lartiste the elder, an old man, with
a clean-shaven face, whose mouth, on the contrary, remained hermetically
closed, with the results that both parts of the duet--not only the
cooing roulades of the woman, but also the frenzied appeals of the man,
his prayers, his promises, his metamorphoses into a bird and a
butterfly--seemed to issue from the yawning throat of Mireille, that
gulf where you saw a host of little pieces of mechanism madly at work.
The loving couple had a great success.

“M. le Hourteulx next,” said young Simare. “Our millionaire is going to
sing for you, madame, for, you know, he has been smitten with a passion
since he saw you in church; a passion shared, of course, by his enemy
Beaufrelant, for the two men always form the same wishes, so as to have
the pleasure of thwarting each other. It’s a long-standing hatred: le
Hourteulx was married once; and it seems that Beaufrelant....”

Simare bent over towards Gilberte and whispered a few words in her ear.

Young Lartiste, who owed his fame as a great actor to his name and to
his name alone, was reserved for the end.

“No one recites like young Lartiste,” people said at Domfront.

And, from the first words that he spoke, everybody watched Gilberte, to
enjoy her amazement. Unfortunately, Simare was continuing his more or
less decorous reflexions; and Gilberte, although not always catching his
exact meaning, felt so uncomfortable that she did not listen to young
Lartiste at all and forgot to applaud at the striking passages, an
omission that was put down to her bad taste.

“Mme. de la Vaudraye is furious,” said Simare. “Her son’s gone. And I
expect she jolly well lectured him about making himself agreeable to
you. By Jove, when you’re a mother, you have to think of your son’s
future. But Guillaume making himself agreeable is a sight that was never
yet seen! Besides, he looks down upon us too much to remain in the
drawing-room. Just fancy, a writer like him!... Oh, I say, madame, look
at the eyes Beaufrelant’s making at you! Beaufrelant is the Don Juan of
Domfront. No one can resist him. They even say ... but I don’t know if I
ought.... Pooh, you have a fan ... if you want to blush....”

And he again leant over towards Gilberte.

She rose from her seat at the first words. Mme. de la Vaudraye came
running up to her:

“I am sure that that scapegrace of a Simare is saying all sorts of
things that he shouldn’t.”

She drew her aside:

“Be careful with him, my child,” she said. “I can see through his
designs: he is trying to compromise you. He is head over ears in debt
and hunting for a fortune.... But haven’t you seen Guillaume? Wait for
me here, I’ll bring him to you.”

Simare came up to Gilberte:

“I must apologize to you, madame; I shocked you just now.”

“No, no,” stammered Gilberte, driven to her wits’ end by this
persistency, “only I thought I ought not to....”

He interrupted her:

“It was I who ought not. I couldn’t help it: I was talking, talking a
little at random, lest I should say what I have no right to say, what
lies deep down within myself, one of those involuntary sentiments....”

“I am so sorry, Mme. Armand,” cried the hostess, returning. “My son was
a little tired and has gone up to his room.”

The musical and literary evening was over. But the resources of the la
Vaudraye _salon_ did not end there. Its frequenters prided themselves on
knowing how to talk. And the conversation went by rule, of course, as
everything went by rule in this society which, by the almost daily
repetition of the same acts, had established habits as strong as
immutable laws.

The licensed talkers were M. Beaufrelant, who, they said, cultivated the
flowers of rhetoric with the same zeal and the same success as the
flowers of the soil; Mme. de la Vaudraye, who specialized in literary
discussions; M. Lartiste, who, as a printer, was naturally marked out
for the loftiest philosophical speculations; M. Simare the elder, a
remarkable spinner of anecdotes; and, lastly, M. Charmeron and his
sister-in-law, Mme. Bottentuit, who found, in their morbid need for
contradicting and disputing with each other, an inexhaustible source of
opinions, witticisms and banter. Outside these privileged and, so to
speak, official protagonists, it was very seldom that any one ventured
to open his mouth.

Gilberte, who was beginning to feel terribly bored, listened without a
word, which was taken for a sign of admiring deference. The truth is
that this oratorical joust surprised her greatly. All these people,
speaking turn and turn about, seemed to be pursuing so many different
conversations, each of them thinking only of shining in the department
that had devolved upon himself. M. Lartiste, who had talked his best on
capital punishment, the subject in which he excelled, was answered by
Mme. de la Vaudraye with a vigorous parallel between the respective
merits of Victor Hugo and Lamartine, which parallel was duly refuted in
a lyrical outburst from M. Beaufrelant on the bulbs of the double
dahlia.

And the utmost seriousness presided over all this incoherence, each
disputant confounding, with deadly earnestness, the interlocutor in whom
he saw such another indomitable as himself. And the dumb circle of
hearers listened with nods and grunts of approval, as though these
strange discussions had excited them to the highest pitch.

“Well ... and you?” said Mme. de la Vaudraye to M. Simare the elder, at
the exact moment when the ardour of the tourney seemed about to wane.
“Are you not in form to-day?”

M. Simare, the anecdotist, smiled. His strong point lay in saying
nothing until he was questioned; and his dry silence, rich in promise,
lent enormous value to the one anecdote to which he treated you each
evening, after carefully preparing, polishing, repolishing and chipping
it like a precious stone. Everybody burst out laughing before he even
opened his mouth: it was understood from his manner that the story would
be a little ... naughty.

He said:

“I do not know if I can speak. There are young ears present.”

A movement on the part of the mothers, a glance; and the five young
ladies disappeared “without seeming to.”

He insisted:

“All the same, I feel bound to warn you that it is a very risqué story.
I shall call a spade a spade: local colour demands it.”

“Go on, M. Simare!” said somebody. “We are all married people here!”

Gilberte was sitting in the front row of chairs, understanding nothing
of the departure of the young girls nor of all this preamble and in
absolute ignorance of what was looming ahead.

M. Simare walked up to her, bowed to her gallantly, like a bull-fighter
dedicating his next feat of prowess to the most prominent person present
and sat down four feet in front of her. And he began:

“The setting first, madame. Picture the skirt of a wood: _dramatis
personæ_, Fanchon and her friend Colin, who is whispering sweet nothings
in her ear, very much in her ear, and ... but wait! At no great
distance, in the middle of the wood, his reverence the rector is
strolling, reading his breviary; and his walk takes him in the direction
of our young rustics.... He comes.... He comes nearer and nearer.... Do
you see the picture, madame?”

“Yes, yes,” said Gilberte, earnestly, like a child who is interested in
a fairy-tale. “What next?”

“The sun darts his rays through the branches, from the patches of blue
sky....”

He continued his description at length, talked of the rector and the
birds and the flowers and the cool shade of the trees; and, strange to
say, there was not another word about Fanchon and Colin.

“M. Simare is a little discursive this evening,” whispered somebody. “He
is not coming to the point as quickly as usual.”

In fact, he was veering away from it, with his eyes fixed on Gilberte,
who listened eagerly and who repeated, at intervals:

“And then? What next?”

Thereupon, he got more and more entangled in the poetic stroll of the
rector, who kept on walking and never seemed to come as far as Fanchon
and Colin. And it was Gilberte who, at last, exclaimed:

“But what became of Colin and Fanchon?”

Then the old boy made a decisive gesture:

“I can’t, I can’t tell you.... No, I won’t tell you....”

Everybody rose. Everybody protested.

M. Simare took refuge in laughter:

“Well, no, I won’t tell you.”

“But why not?”

“Why not? I don’t know! It’s her eyes.... There are words one can’t
utter when one looks at her, there are things one can’t tell.”

He was no longer laughing. The others were silent. And he continued:

“Look at her eyes. They gaze at you so softly, so innocently.... All the
time that I was talking my nonsense, I wanted to invent something for
her, something about saints and angels and a good little girl who loves
her mother and only thinks of pleasing her and is happy from morning
till night....”




V

THE SUITORS


Gilberte went to more of Mme. de la Vaudraye’s evenings: not that she
liked them much; but she did not wish to have it thought that she
disliked them.

And her presence delighted all the frequenters of the _salon_, the most
cross-grained ladies and the most indifferent men alike. It was a
curious influence exercised by that mere child; and she owed it neither
to her experience--for what did she know of life?--nor to her tact--for
what aim had she in view?--but to an inexplicable charm which affected
all who came near her and which, at the same time, protected her against
them. Her innocence was a greater attraction than any subtlety or
intellectual charm and defended her to better purpose than prudence
would have done or cleverness.

Old Simare was mad about her. Mme. Bottentuit told her all the secrets
of her home life. Mme. Charmeron confided to her that she was
broken-hearted at having nothing but daughters, but that she had not
given up hope yet. Mlle. du Bocage hid her head on Gilberte’s shoulder,
wept and told her all her old-maidenly disappointments and regrets.

“You are the ornament of my _salon_, Gilberte,” said Mme. de la
Vaudraye.

She was not jealous of her. Gilberte, with her exquisite compassion, had
guessed that the former lady of the Logis must still suffer from the
ruin of her fortunes, must still feel how stunted and narrow was her
life; and she showed her more attention than she did to any other.

Out of kindness to the mother she even tried to win the son’s
sympathies; but here she encountered a medley of such shyness and
rudeness, so unlovable a nature and so marked a determination to repel
her advances and treat her as he treated the other frequenters of the
_salon_ that Gilberte was quite discomfited.

“Do not be discouraged,” said the mother. “He is a little unsociable;
but he is so full of good qualities.”

Nevertheless, Gilberte once heard her mutter between her teeth:

“What a bear that boy is!”

And she heard on all sides that mother and son did not agree.

The _salon_ underwent a change. There were as many commonplaces uttered
as ever; but those who spoke them did so with less smug importance than
before. People were less sure of themselves. The talented amateurs in
singing and piano-playing sought for shades of expression and feeling.
Lastly, the order of the concert became “subject to alterations” and the
performers no longer wore the air of automata obeying predestined laws.
There were asides in the conversation; people talked among themselves,
for the pleasure of talking and in accordance with their various
sympathies.

One evening, Beaufrelant drew Gilberte into a corner and said:

“I am mad, madame, do you hear? I am mad. I care for nothing, I am
indifferent to my flowers, it is you all the time. I am free: my name,
my life are yours; give me some hope....”

The next day, le Hourteulx made his declaration:

“Life has become a burden to me. If you do not take pity on me, madame,
I shall cease to exist.... But I can hardly believe that you will reject
me.... Do you dislike me?... I am a widower and well-off, you know....”

That was the only dark spot that troubled Gilberte’s serenity: the more
or less discreet attentions which all those men paid her. Simare the
younger went far more cleverly to work and tried to inspire confidence
with a pretence of delicacy by which Gilberte allowed herself to be
taken in. But Beaufrelant and Le Hourteulx showed no pity: they pursued
her relentlessly, speaking to her, not unnaturally, as to a woman who
knows what life is and who could not well take offence at a declaration
or even at the terms in which it was made.

Poor Gilberte did not take offence, but she was very much surprised; and
the sighs and transports of those two men of forty bored her terribly.
She avoided them and she also had to avoid young Lartiste, who tried the
effect of poetry and fired the most passionate verses of Musset and
Verlaine at her; the brother too of the Demoiselles Bottentuit, a
schoolboy who was only let out on Thursdays and Sundays and who, the
third time he saw her, threatened to kill himself at her feet; and
lastly a cousin of Mlle. du Bocage, who was engaged to the elder
Charmeron girl and who offered to break off the marriage and abandon a
very good match if it caused her the faintest annoyance.

She no longer enjoyed at the Logis the atmosphere of peace and isolation
so dear to her. Adèle had to defend the door, with the vigilance of a
watch-dog, against the daring suitors who tried to obtain admission to
her mistress upon some pretext:

“Madame is at home to nobody; I have positive instructions.”

The old servant saw through the disguise of M. le Hourteulx, who
appeared dressed up as a beggar, and of Beaufrelant, who, in cap and
blouse, came round with a green-grocer’s barrow.

Gilberte could not go for a stroll in her garden without seeing the
figure of one or other of those importunate gentlemen on the right, in
the next garden which ran from the castle down to the river. At
nightfall, she was conscious of shadowy forms prowling round the
manor-house. She felt herself spied upon on every side, stalked like a
beast of the chase.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was Easter Sunday. After dinner, Adèle and her husband went to the
fair, just outside the town. Gilberte was left alone.

It had been raining; and the fresh smell of wet leaves and moist earth
came through the open window of the boudoir which she had made into her
study. The book which she was reading in an absent-minded way dropped to
her lap and she sat dreaming, with her gaze lost in the blackness of the
trees. And, quite without reason--for the least sound would have struck
her ear--she was overcome with an indescribable sense of dread, which
increased from moment to moment. The silence seemed to her unnatural and
awful. The darkness was heavy with menace; and she could not take her
eyes from it, sat spellbound by the unknown peril which she felt was
there.

A recollection doubled her fears. On the evening before at Mme. de la
Vaudraye’s, a turn in the conversation had led her to say that her
servants were going to this fair. So they knew that she was all alone at
the Logis.

Her one thought was to close the window, fasten down the shutters and
place an obstacle between herself and the snares that were being laid
for her in the threatening darkness; and yet she dared not stir, as
though the least movement would have exposed her to immediate
dangers.... But what dangers?

She made an effort and rose from her chair. At the same moment, a head
appeared and a man strode across the balcony and sprang into the room.
It was Simare.

The revulsion of feeling was such that she almost felt inclined to
laugh. Wearily, she sat down and murmured:

“Oh, monsieur, you ought not to have done this!... I should never have
thought it of you....”

He flung himself on his knees:

“Do not judge me unheard.... I am not master of myself.... I have to go
away for a month ... and I wanted to see you ... to tell you what I
feel, what I suffer.... Oh, you don’t know how your indifference has
tortured me.... My sadness, my admiration, my hopes, my emotion, when in
your presence: you have understood none of these ... but then you never
do understand.... At this very moment, when I am here, at your knees,
when I am imploring you, when I am proclaiming my sorrow and my
obsession, I feel that my words do not reach you. And yet they must. You
must, you shall know what I have to say to you.... Listen to me....”

But Gilberte would not listen. Although her extreme innocence had
preserved her at first contact with the world, nevertheless she was
beginning to see a glimmer of the meaning of many things; and she was
frightened of the words that were coming. No, she would not hear them
from the lips of this man, she would not allow this man to be the first
to speak them in her ear. She had a sudden intuition of their importance
and their sweetness and their magic; and she felt that it was almost a
contamination to hear them.

She entreated him:

“Be quiet.... I shall be so grateful if you will....”

“No, no,” he cried, “I must speak. Ever since I have known you, the
words I have to say have been on my lips, suffocating me.... Gilberte,
Gilberte, I....”

She gave a desperate glance, the glance of a victim which does not know
how to defend itself and awaits the blow that is about to fall. He
stammered:

“Oh, your eyes ... your eyes ...!”

He remained on his knees, humble and undecided, and repeated, in a low
voice:

“Your eyes ... yes ... my father told me ... child’s eyes that put one
off....”

He rose and struck his fist upon the table:

“No, after all, I will not allow myself to be thwarted. I mean to speak
and I shall speak.... If your eyes prevent me, well, I sha’n’t see your
eyes!”

He went to the lamp and, with a sudden movement, put it out.

Gilberte gave a scream. She tried to run away, stumbled over a chair and
fell. She tried to call out; and her voice died away in her throat.

Then, powerless, she stirred no more.

He seized her hand and raised it to his lips.

She made a weak attempt to release herself, but strength failed her.

She said, simply:

“Please, monsieur ... I have never done you any harm.... I have always
been kind to you.... Please....”

His hand slacked its grasp. They remained opposite each other. What was
he going to say to her? At her wits’ end, with her heart wildly beating,
she tried, through the darkness, through the great, impenetrable
silence that enshrouded the two of them, to see Simare’s face, to read
his tumultuous thoughts, his will.... A few seconds passed....

Then he said:

“I beg your pardon.... I am a scoundrel.... I wanted to force you to
take my name, to share my existence.... It was cowardly and base of
me.... Still, there was more in me, believe me, than wicked designs....
Oh, I hear your heart beating ... do not tremble!... You will never be
in danger from any one ... it is not only your eyes that protect you:
there is the sound of your voice, there is your silence, there is the
air you breathe, your mere presence.... Forgive me....”

He went away, She dimly saw him cross the window-rail and presently
heard the sound of his steps as he walked down the gravel-path in the
garden.

Gilberte rushed to the door. She could not have stayed for another
instant in the solitude of that room.

It was an intolerable agony, of which she felt the grip even more now
that Simare was no longer there. Where should she go? To Mme. de la
Vaudraye’s? She remembered vaguely that it was not one of her
“evenings,” because of the fair. No matter. She wanted people, lights,
bustle, men and women in whose presence she could master her fears and
pluck up courage.

She ran to her bedroom, put on her hat and cloak.... But no, she dared
not go out....

A noise came from the square in front of the Logis, on the town side;
the noise of an altercation, of a struggle. She drew back the curtains.
Two men were fighting under her windows. In her fright, she flew to the
bolt, locked herself in and crouched down in the furthest corner of her
room. Her instinct, her weakness impelled her to hide herself, to know
nothing of what was happening, to wait.... But the din increased. There
were shouts and moans.

Then she was ashamed of her cowardice. It was impossible for her to
continue in that nervous inactivity. She wanted to interfere, to help,
if there were still time. Bravely, she opened the door, went down the
stairs, walked out into the square and up to the combatants.

By the light of the lamp she recognized Beaufrelant and Le Hourteulx.

Rolling on the ground, covered with mud, hatless, their clothes all
disarranged, they were fighting with a sort of mad rage, with the
stubbornness of two mortal enemies rejoicing in an opportunity of
vengeance long deferred. They struck at each other in turns, collared
each other, bashed each other’s faces with their fists, wrestled
violently. And this amid insults and exclamations of triumph:

“Here, you villain, take that!”

“One for you!”

“Ah, my fine fellow, you caught it this time! How did that strike you?”

And they called Gilberte to witness, like the queen of a tournament in
whose honour two of her knights were breaking a lance:

“What do you think of that, madame?”

“Got in there with my left, madame!”

“Ah, he was looking out for you, the scoundrel!”

“Oh, you blackguard, you were prowling round her house!”

Abandoning all attempts at interference, she turned to move away. They
rose with difficulty and followed her, each hustling his rival as he
went on trying to get rid of him. But the heat of the struggle brought
them to the ground again; and she ran away.

The first street to which her steps led her came out in front of the
church. The La Vaudrayes’ house was close by; and she hastened to it.

No one answered when she rang the bell. Still, there was a light in the
drawing-room. She tapped at one of the windows. Some one came to the
door. It was Guillaume de la Vaudraye.

“You, madame!” he exclaimed.

“Where’s your mother? Where’s your mother?” she panted.

“My mother is at Caen, on business; I am alone in the house.”

She walked to the drawing-room unsteadily and sank into a chair.

“What is the matter? Why are you here?”

She whispered, in a broken voice:

“They came.... They are following me.... I am frightened of them....”

“Simare, was it?... And Le Hourteulx, I suppose ... and Beaufrelant....”

“Yes ... so I daren’t go back....”

“But Adèle ... and her husband?”

“Gone to the fair.”

He thought for a moment and said:

“I will go and fetch them. It’s some way off. Take a rest until we
come: you need it.”

Gilberte, utterly exhausted, fell asleep.

Adèle woke her. There was a taxi waiting for her. Guillaume did not show
himself again.




VI

A NEW FRIEND


Two days later Domfront could not believe its ears when it heard that
all relations had been broken off between the La Vaudrayes on the one
hand and Beaufrelant and Le Hourteulx on the other. The two no longer
formed part of the _salon_.

“Oh, nonsense! Beaufrelant and Le Hourteulx, who have been there longer
than anybody, who date back to the days when the La Vaudrayes saw their
friends at the Logis: it’s impossible!”

“It’s quite true, for all that. I heard it from Mme. Duval, who is
constantly at all three houses; and she saw the letters which Mme. de la
Vaudraye wrote.”

“Well, you can say what you please, but it’s a great pity. M. le
Hourteulx: such a fine voice! And M. Beaufrelant: such a brilliant
talker! And have you heard the reason?”

“No, I can’t imagine.... If I hear the least thing, I’ll let you know.”

Gilberte was very much vexed when Adèle told her what had happened. She
had no doubt that Guillaume de la Vaudraye had told his mother what he
knew of the incident and she was distressed at being the cause of
disagreement, complication and gossip.

“Perhaps,” she thought, “all this would not have come about if I had not
been looked upon as married.”

And, as a matter of fact, she seemed, as a married woman, to be exposed
to unpleasantness which she would have escaped in the position of a
girl. Instead of the quiet which she had sought, she found, in the men’s
behaviour, in their conversation, in their way of looking at her, in the
persistency of their pursuit, a host of disturbing little annoyances
which might well have troubled a mind less innocent than hers.

She went to Mme. de la Vaudraye, in the afternoon, and begged her to
reconsider her decision.

“It is no use asking me,” cried Mme. de la Vaudraye. “I admit that, in
writing to those two gentlemen, I did no more than my duty; but it was
my son who pointed out to me how imperative that duty was.”

She was in a bad temper and, when all is said, with reason. No mistress
of a house lightly gives up two individuals of the undoubted merit of M.
Beaufrelant and M. le Hourteulx. She called out:

“Guillaume, Mme. Armand wants to talk to you!”

And, when her son entered the room, she went out.

Gilberte, who was always frightened by Guillaume’s obvious coldness and
his excessive reserve, blushed as she made her request. Ought so much
importance to be attached to an incident which the two gentlemen surely
regretted and at which she could only laugh?

“My mother and I have no right to laugh at it,” he said. “We are
responsible for all the people whom we introduce to you. If one of them
treats you with disrespect, we must not expose you to meeting him here.”

“But how have they treated me with disrespect?... I assure you, I don’t
see it....”

He looked at her, turned away his head and said, in a voice so abrupt
that she could not make out whether his answer was full of contemptuous
pity or affectionate admiration:

“It is the others, it is all of us who must see for you.... How can you
be expected to see those things?”

He paused and continued:

“Are you very anxious to have those two boors back here?”

“For your mother’s sake, yes. I feel that the situation grieves her.”

“Why, of course,” he exclaimed, with cutting irony, “they are the two
finest ornaments of her _salon_! How will the others do without them?
How will they manage to rattle out the regulation tomfoolery? Will they
ever be able to reach the required level of absurdity, affectation,
stupidity and narrowness? Heavens, if we were a shade less dull and less
inane, what a catastrophe!”

“It’s not right of you to talk like that, monsieur,” said Gilberte.

“What!” he said, taken aback.

“No, you ought not to laugh at what is a great pleasure to your mother.
If some of her friends are a little eccentric, it is not for you to
remark upon it.”

He rose, began to walk excitedly up and down the room and then,
gradually mastering himself, came and sat opposite Gilberte again and
said:

“You are right, madame. Besides, among all those people whom I cannot
help criticizing, I have never heard you speak any but sensible,
judicious, intelligent words, admirable for their kindness and wisdom.
You always answer their most ridiculous questions as though they had
asked you about the most interesting things in life. One word from you
brings order and lucidity into the most absurd conversations.”

It was no longer the same voice. Usually so hard and dictatorial, it had
become humble and grave. And his face, which was generally severe, bore
an expression of infinite gentleness. One was no longer conscious of
acrimony, constraint or distrust, but of the frank unreserve of a
pent-up nature and of subdued melancholy.

Which of the two was the real Guillaume? Gilberte did not even ask
herself the question, was only too happy to believe at once in the more
attractive of the two images presented to her. And so she smiled upon
this second Guillaume and said:

“Then ... those gentlemen ...?”

“Your two protégés shall resume the places which they fill so well. I
insist, however, on a temporary exclusion as a punishment; for it is a
punishment to Le Hourteulx and Beaufrelant. After that, if they are very
good....”

“And you will be pleasant to them?”

“To them and to the others, at least as pleasant as I can.”

“Is it so very difficult?”

“Extremely! I can’t help it: I do not suffer fools gladly; they make me
irritable and unjust. I have not your charity.”

“It only needs a little indulgence; think of your mother.”

“Oh, my mother, my mother!”

There was something sorrowful and harsh about this exclamation that
struck Gilberte. She kept silence from a sense of delicacy. But
Guillaume was passing through one of those periods when it is a relief
to the over-burdened soul to confess its troubles:

“Have my mother and I ever understood each other? We have not an idea in
common. Her wants are not mine, nor are mine hers. She offends all my
tastes as I offend all hers. If I display so much bitterness against the
merry-andrews who perform in her _salon_, it is because of her. I hate
to see her countenancing their grimaces and posturings.”

She said nothing. He asked:

“You blame me for it, don’t you? Yes, yes, I feel it.... And how
strange: in your presence, I too think that I am wrong and, while I was
saying those things, I blushed as if I had uttered ugly thoughts!”

She laughed:

“They were not very pretty ones.”

“Never mind, I prefer you to know them. I do not wish to trick you into
liking me. If I ever win your esteem, I want to do so without hypocrisy,
without trying to hide my faults from you.”

No one had ever spoken to Gilberte with such seriousness and deference.
She felt quite touched and, with a spontaneous movement, held out her
hand to Guillaume:

“We shall be friends,” she said. “I am sure that we shall be friends.”

He was on the point of raising her small, gloved hand to his lips, but
he restrained himself. And she went on:

“So this is the unsociable Guillaume de la Vaudraye! Will you believe
that you quite frightened me with your surly ways? You did indeed!”

After this interview, Gilberte did two or three errands and returned to
the Logis. It was drawing towards evening. She made for the summer-house
and saw her dream-companion in the distance. She said to him, as though
he could hear her and as though she felt bound to tell him the good news
without delay:

“You know, I have a new friend!”

And Gilberte saw nothing extraordinary in this sudden friendship, based
upon the exchange of a few sentences. Was she not one of those
unsophisticated beings who always obey the unreflecting impulse of
their hearts, who look you straight in the eyes and who do not think it
out of place to tell people how they feel towards them?

And so, the next evening, she went to Mme. de la Vaudraye’s, quite happy
at the thought of seeing her new friend again. A disappointment awaited
her: Guillaume did not appear.

She went back next day. Guillaume came down to the drawing-room, bowed
to her and seemed to take no further notice of her presence.

Thereupon, on the third day, while the others were listening to Mlle. du
Bocage and M. Lartiste the elder in the duet from _Mireille_, Gilberte,
finding that Guillaume was alone in the next room, went out to him. She
at once saw that he tried to avoid her. Realizing this to be impossible,
he gave a gesture of vexation and crossed his arms in an indifferent
attitude.

“What about your promise?” she asked, playfully, but a little sadly.
“You promised to make yourself pleasant to your enemies in the _salon_;
and this is the best you can do! Am I not entitled to complain? Did we
not shake hands as friends?”

He uncrossed his arms and his expression changed. Once again she felt
the relaxation of a tense will, the immediate suppression of all
resistance in this silent man whose square chin and inflexible eyes bore
witness to his obstinacy.

“Good!” she said. “Capital! But you still look a little fierce....
That’s better!... And now, come along.”

He stopped her:

“Do not ask too much of me. You are so far above ordinary life, so
inaccessible, that you can mix with those people and remain serene and
untouched. I could only do so at the risk of deteriorating. One must
make allowance for different temperaments. I shall be polite, that’s
all.”

Then she stayed and they talked.

Often, after that, Gilberte had to go to him and open, as she said, the
door of his prison-house, unbind his hands and deliver his captive soul.
But she did it so easily that it amused them both.

“You have but to lift your little finger,” Guillaume would say, “to
bring down the prison-walls.”

Under this uneven and rugged husk, Gilberte discovered the most
exquisite and delicate of natures, a poet’s nature that was galled by
all its surroundings, a child’s nature that his mother had kept in to
the verge of pain. And it was often from the point of view of a child
that Gilberte was glad to be with him. They would laugh at the least
thing, with that childish laughter, which is so good just because it has
no excuse except our need of laughter. They longed to run and skip and
play.

“Oh dear, how young I am!” Guillaume would exclaim.

“I shall be two next year,” Gilberte declared.

They could be serious also. She asked him about his writing, wanted to
read what he had printed. He refused, on the pretext that he was not
satisfied. Nevertheless, he showed her a letter from the editor of an
important review, a letter teeming with compliments.

He lent her his favorite books and she devoured them.

Mme. de la Vaudraye was in ecstasies. She was now certain that her dream
would be realized. She was too clever to betray her delight and hid it
under demonstrations of gratitude:

“How sweet of you, my dear Gilberte, to tame that wild savage! You will
make quite a courtier of him.”

And she added, with a sigh:

“Oh, if you could only turn him into a more attentive son and make him
more grateful to his mother for all the sacrifices she has made for
him!”

The discord between Mme. de la Vaudraye and Guillaume was Gilberte’s
greatest grief. Her love of harmony prompted her to make continual
endeavours at reconciliation which were bound to fail as much because of
the mother’s arid artificiality as of the son’s stubbornness and
reserve.

She had to give up the attempt.

But she suffered another pain, arising from her extreme sensitiveness:
at the close of day, she could no longer go to the ruined summer-house
without a certain sense of discomfort. Her unknown friend was faithful
to the daily tryst which they had made with their dreams; and, though
Gilberte herself never failed to keep it, she felt as though she had
done him some wrong. With her eyes fixed on the distant mountains
melting into the deep blue of the heavens, she let herself drift into
vague reveries, far, very far away from the homely valley where her
first friend patiently waited for her thoughts to return to him. It was
at such times, when the darkness overtook her amidst this delightful
torpor, that she seemed to be coming back from a long journey. She was
almost angry with herself. But why? She could not have said.

One day, at five o’clock, as she was going down to her garden, she
received a note from Mme. de la Vaudraye.

     “MY DEAR GILBERTE,

     “Guillaume and I are going for a stroll in the Forest of Andaine.
     It is such a fine evening: do come with us.”

Should she go? To do so meant a break in sweet custom that had lent such
charm to the most oppressive hours of her life, meant throwing over the
constant friendship of the bad days.

She wavered and, wavering, went up to her room, put on her things, went
out and knocked at the La Vaudrayes’ door.

Whatever regrets may have lingered in her conscientious mind were very
soon dispelled by the pleasure which the walk gave her from the start.
Spring was trying her hand, at the tips of the branches, with tiny
pale-green leaves and, along the roadsides and ditches, with those
charming early flowers which are so dear to us: anemones, periwinkles,
primroses, wild hyacinths, lilies of the valley.... Arched lanes sped
into the depths of the woods. Sweet scents, songs and colours played and
mingled in all the gladness of new-born nature.

They walked without speaking. Sometimes, Guillaume and Gilberte would
point out to each other, with a glance, a corner of the landscape, or
the outline of a tree, or the glint of a ray of sunshine, both wishing
the other to share their delight and admiration.

They sat down on the edge of a pool whose waters slumbered amidst a
circle of old pines that joined their arms around them as though to
dance a moveless measure. It was one of those abodes of silence that
open only in the hearts of old forests. Those who are brought there by
chance and who grasp the fitness of things are themselves silent.

Mme. de la Vaudraye exclaimed:

“On the first fine Sunday, we must make up a party and come here. It is
a lovely spot for a picnic. What do you say?”

They did not reply. She continued:

“Every one will bring his own provisions. Of course, Mme. Charmeron will
make her famous spiced beef and Mlle. du Bocage her prune-tart. And, at
dessert, everybody must come out with a set of verses!”

Guillaume hurled a pebble violently into the mirror of the water.

“What’s the matter with you?” asked Mme. de la Vaudraye.

He sprang up and confronted her, angrily, impatiently, with tense
wrists. But, as he was about to speak, he met Gilberte’s eyes, sad and
full of entreaty. He seemed quite dazed, his lips trembled and suddenly
he took Mme. de la Vaudraye in his arms and began to kiss her with all
his might, with all his fervent soul. And he blurted out:

“It’s quite right ... you’re my mother ... you’re my mother ... you’re
entitled to say what you please.... What you say is right.... It’s my
business to understand.... Oh, mother, if you only knew ...!”




VII

GILBERTE’S TWO FRIENDS


Gilberte did not go to the summer-house again. A feeling of delicacy
kept her away. Nevertheless, each day, at the accustomed hour, something
like a light cloud passed over her mind; and she was not far from
accusing herself of ingratitude.

What was but a vague remorse towards a friend whom she had never known
took a more definite shape, in another sense, with regard to him whom
she now saw almost daily. She would so much have liked to offer him a
brand-new friendship and to feel the excitement of it for the first
time! True, there was no struggle between two sentiments, since one was
so far-off and vague, the other so vivid and distinct. And yet....

There are childish conflicts which would not even ripple the most
scrupulous soul, but which form the mighty storms of peaceful and
innocent consciences such as Gilberte’s.

But all this took place deep down within herself, unconsciously, so to
speak, and could not diminish her magical delight in living. For magic
it was, something that approached a miracle, when she compared the gloom
of the past with the dazzling life of the present. Whence did she derive
the joy with which she thrilled at her awakening; the enthusiasm that
swept her at the sight of a flower, of a landscape, of any spectacle a
hundred times witnessed and never fully seen; that exaltation of
thought, those sudden blushes, that inexplicable torpor of her whole
being and, at the same time, that unchangeable serenity which doubled
the uncertainty of her life with strength, faith, patience and
certainty?

There was no allusion to the incident in the Forest of Andaine. But,
from that time onward, Mme. de la Vaudraye looked upon her son in a
different fashion; and, in the same way, in her conduct towards
Gilberte, there was something that had hitherto been lacking: a touch of
respect.

Guillaume said to Gilberte:

“You are a regular fairy, no, more than a fairy, for you exercise your
power without knowing or trying. To do good, to disarm hatred, to heal
wounds, to make others want to be indulgent and kind, you have no need
even to wish. You have only to be as you are; and everything around you
grows nobler and better.”

She listened and smiled. From him she accepted praise without blushing.
He could have praised her beauty and enumerated all her charms without
causing her to lower her eyes. He could not wound her maidenly modesty.

One morning, following upon a day when Gilberte had not been to Mme. de
la Vaudraye’s, Adèle came back from the town all out of breath:

“Oh, ma’am, here’s a nice to do! Yesterday, at Mme. de la Vaudraye’s
evening, young M. Simare....”

“I thought he was away,” said Gilberte, interrupting her.

“He is back; and, last evening, he and M. Guillaume, during the duet
from _Mireille_, had some words in a corner ... they were heard
quarrelling.... It seems that the elder M. Simare told a story that
wasn’t quite proper and M. Guillaume went for the son about it.”

“Oh, it’s all my fault!” said Gilberte to herself, feeling certain that
Guillaume had taken the first opportunity to bring about a rupture.

And she asked:

“Is that all?”

“Yes. Mme. Duval saw two officers ringing at the Simares’ house just now
and she says that M. Guillaume has ordered the landau from the hotel
for presently ... but that has nothing to do with it.”

Though she did not foresee the possible consequences of an altercation
between the two young men, Gilberte was convinced that no interference
on her part would settle things, as it had done with M. le Hourteulx and
M. Beaufrelant. Guillaume would not consent to have M. Simare admitted
to the house again. The father would side with his son. Mme. de la
Vaudraye would be furious at losing two of her regular visitors. In
short, it meant a whole series of bothers and quarrels, of which
Gilberte would have been the real cause.

She was very low-spirited at lunch. A presentiment of danger depressed
her, but she could not have said of what sort it was nor whom it
threatened.

Her suffering must have been genuine to induce her to rise suddenly, go
out and turn her steps towards the La Vaudrayes’ house. But what she
was doing must also have seemed to her very useless and very serious to
make her stop suddenly, with frightened hesitation. How was she to act?
Whom was she to influence? What events was she to avert?

The church was near and she went in. But she was unable to pray; and her
anxiety became all the more painful inasmuch as she did not know its
reason. Then, rather than return to the Logis, where inactivity would
have been intolerable, she went along the high-road to the bottom of the
valley, followed the Varenne for a short distance and then climbed up
towards the Haute-Chapelle.

At three o’clock, feeling a little tired, she made for the shade on the
skirt of a little wood and sat down. She had hardly left the road when
the hotel landau passed and turned down the forest-lane. Was Guillaume
in it?

A sound of harness-bells, the crack of a whip told her that another
carriage was on its way. A break came dashing along, carrying Simare and
a couple of officers, and disappeared down the same lane.

For a second, Gilberte stood breathless at a horrible thought. She would
not, no, she would not have it! Then, suddenly, she began to run at full
speed. A cross-roads brought her to a stop forthwith. Which of the three
roads should she take?

She chose the one on the right, but, after running fifty yards, went
back to the middle one and then to the one on the left. After that, she
roamed at random, beating the copses, hunting on the grass for the marks
of carriage-wheels, flinging herself among the ferns, listening and
looking with all her nerves on edge....

A shot ... and a second, at almost the same moment ... close by....

She gave a scream and fell to the ground.

A few minutes passed. As though in a dream, she saw, through the
branches, the two carriages driving by. Then voices sounded:

“I assure you, doctor, I am not mistaken. It was a woman screaming.”

She had not the strength to raise her eyelids or speak; but she felt
that two men were coming towards her. One of them bent over her and took
her hand:

“It’s nothing. She has only fainted.”

“In that case, doctor, don’t wait,” said the other voice. “I will see
her home.”

The mist in which she was struggling lifted slowly. She perceived the
smell of the earth on which she lay. She made an effort to throw off the
feeling of sleep that numbed her and she opened her eyes. Guillaume was
standing before her.

“You, you?” she whispered. “Oh, how glad I am! And M. Simare?”

“He’s not hurt either.”

“That’s a good thing.”

There was a pause; and then she asked:

“Why did you do it? It was not right.”

“I lost my head, when he spoke to me last night, and I yielded to an
irresistible impulse of hatred. I did not know what I was doing.”

“But your mother?”

“I have managed to hide the truth from her so far. One of my seconds
said that he would tell her.”

“Go to her, run as fast as you can.... She will be so anxious until she
sees you.... Go at once....”

“No.”

He was so firm that she despaired of persuading him. And yet she wanted
him to go. Then she looked at him and smiled:

“To please me,” she said.

“Very well,” he said, “but you must come too.”

She at once summoned her pluck and rose to her feet; and, when she
expressed her wish to get back without delay he led her through the
short cuts where there was hardly room to walk side by side. But their
pace slackened at once; and they stopped three times to rest on the
road. Gilberte no longer displayed any hurry. What did they say? Nothing
but insignificant words, which they did not remember afterwards.
Nevertheless, when uttering them, they felt that they had never been
interested in weightier matters. What importance could suddenly have
attached, in the course of a walk, to the sight of two initials
interlaced on the bark of a tree, or to the flight of a bird, or to a
stone rolling down a slope! Whereas, to them, these were so many
astounding incidents that deserved a stop and the interchange of a few
ecstatic words.

A contest between some insect and a squad of five ants that were trying
to drag it away kept them for quite a long time. Who would be the
victor? Gilberte took pity on the insect and saved it when it was on the
point of falling in the fray. Guillaume exclaimed, in accents of
profound conviction:

“You are the most generous-hearted creature I have ever met.”

Guillaume compared the moss at the foot of an oak to velvet; and
Gilberte became aware that all the poetry in the world was summed up in
her companion.

Having exhausted their original reflexions, their brilliant remarks and
their mutual admiration, they were silent until they emerged from the
wood. A lane of apple-trees led them past furze and rocks. At the foot
of the slope ran the Varenne. After they had taken a turn, Gilberte
cried:

“Look, that might be my garden, on the other side.... Why, so it is!...
There’s the Logis.... Where are we?”

She walked on. They came to a cluster of small fir-trees. When they had
passed them, they were just opposite the ruined summer-house, with only
the width of the valley in between.

Gilberte gave a start. That spur of the hill, that circle of red rocks
surrounding it, that cluster of firs: was this not the spot where the
unknown stranger, for months ...?

A flood of contradictory feelings welled up within her: feelings of
gratitude towards the invisible friend, feelings of confusion towards
the actual friend, memories of the dear past and visions of the present.
How she wished that she had not come to this place with Guillaume! She
felt inclined to exclaim:

“Go away! Go away!”

But, on turning her head, she was stupefied at the sight of his pallor
and the change in his face:

“What’s the matter? Why don’t you say something? Speak to me!”

She broke off. A sudden thought struck her, an improbable, but madly
delightful idea. She fixed her eyes on his, looked down into his very
soul; and the truth appeared to her so clearly that, leaning against the
side of the rock, she gasped:

“It was you all the time!... It was you!...”

Not for a moment did the shadow of a fear that she was mistaken, cross
her. Holding her head between her hands and closing her eyes, she took
refuge in her happiness as in an inaccessible dwelling from which not
even he could have driven her.

He was speaking now, kneeling before her; and it seemed to Gilberte as
though two voices were joined in that one voice of entreaty, as though
the unknown friend were joining his prayer to Guillaume’s, blending his
image with Guillaume’s, mingling with him and beseeching her with the
same hands, adoring her with the same heart:

“Gilberte, it was the day on which you arrived at Domfront, You were in
the public gardens, near the ruins, and I saw you raise your
mourning-veil. Since that day, my life has been wrapped up in yours.
When you went over the Logis with my mother, I was there, hiding behind
a curtain. You stopped close by me, I was able to take you in my eyes,
to lock you in my breast like a treasure; I heard your voice, I breathed
your fragrance and I lived on that memory for weeks, seeking you,
calling you, hovering round the Logis, hoping for a chance meeting. Oh,
the delight of it when I saw you from here, one afternoon, and when you
came back next day and every day, every day! I was not sure, but it
appeared to me that you saw me ... and then ... that it was just a
little because of me that you came back.”

“I saw you, yes, I saw you,” said Gilberte, without removing her clasped
hands from her face.

He asked:

“Are you crying?”

“I am so happy!”

“Happy?”

“Yes, happy because it was you.”

“Gilberte,” he begged, “I would give worlds to see your tears.”

She showed her dear face all wet with tears, all smiling with tears. He
whispered:

“I love you.”

She seemed surprised and repeated, gravely:

“You love me ... you love me....”

He watched her anxiously. But the bright features lit up anew and she
said to Guillaume, gaily and blithely, as though she had made the most
wonderful and unexpected of discoveries:

“But, you know, Guillaume, I love you too.”

She had the look of a delighted child. She could have clapped her hands,
so great was the enchantment of that magnificent vision of love, so
sweet was it to know that she loved and was loved.

She leant over to him prettily:

“Then you are the one I was loving all the time and it is you that I
love, Guillaume?”

“Gilberte ... please....”

“What do you want? Tell me what you want, Guillaume.”

“Your eyes, Gilberte, to kiss your innocent eyes, your eyes which are
like the eyes of a little girl.”

Closing the lids, she offered her eyes, as though it were a quite
natural thing. He took her in his arms and drew her to him. But a shiver
passed through her at once. She made an instinctive movement of
resistance and moaned:

“No ... no ... oh, please don’t!...”

She was not laughing now. A blush covered her cheeks and forehead. She
no longer dared look at him; and Guillaume’s eyes almost hurt her. This
time, it was the real, perturbing, mysterious revelation of love. Shaken
with emotion, she faltered:

“Go away ... please go away....”

He kissed the hem of her skirt, picked some leaves, some blades of grass
that Gilberte’s feet had trodden and went away.




VIII

THE APPOITMENT


     “GILBERTE:

     “I must not see you again. When you read these lines, I shall have
     left Domfront. You are rich and I am poor: you need look for no
     other explanation of my departure and of my conduct in the past. I
     loved you from the first; and from the first I swore that I would
     shun you and for ever conceal the feeling with which you inspire
     me.

     “Do you now understand why I behaved so coldly to you from the
     beginning, though my heart throbbed at the mere sound of your
     voice; why I was so hard to my mother, whose plans were obvious to
     all and drove me to exasperation: I was afraid lest you should
     think that I was privy to them; why I kept in the background,
     hiding among those rocks, looking at you from a distance as at a
     goal which I knew was, and wished it to be, inaccessible?

     “But you came to me, Gilberte: that is all my excuse. You came to
     me out of kindness to my mother, perhaps also prompted by that
     instinct which makes us conscious of love where it lies deepest.
     What could I do against your fascination? I did not even struggle.
     I closed my eyes to all that was not you, you and your beauty and
     your smile and your charming grace and the colour of your hair and
     the freshness of your cheeks and the rhythm of your footsteps; and,
     with not a further thought of my oath or the inevitable
     consequences of my weakness, I accepted the infinite joy that came
     to me. Oh, Gilberte, those few weeks!... But there was something
     which I had never imagined in my boldest dreams: you loved me, you
     also loved me.

     “You love me, which means that happiness is within my reach
     to-morrow, the next day, every day. It is there, I have but to
     take it; a word from me and you are my wife. For I know you, my
     beloved: the gift of your heart is the gift of your entire life.

     “And so I must go, if I would not be overcome by temptation....

     “Oh, Gilberte, you do not know what I am feeling and suffering, you
     who do not know what you are, you who are all that is most human
     and most divine, most noble and most simple, a miracle of harmony,
     attractiveness and light. But you know nothing of yourself and will
     never know anything. One could tell you and your mirror could teach
     you all the perfections of your face and form; and yet you would
     not know them. Were you a child of ten, wearing the white frock of
     your first communion, I should proclaim my admiration with the same
     frankness and with no greater fear of hurting your modesty. The
     whole world might be at your feet, chanting your praises; and you
     would be none the less humble. That is the marvel of your
     ingenuous nature. All is merged in your purity, as in a great,
     limpid sea in which every impurity would vanish. It is impossible
     to think of you without evoking images of whiteness, of
     transparency, of crystal water. By what mystery has it come that
     the trials of life, the realities of marriage have not soiled the
     freshness of your innocent eyes?

     “And so I shall never see your eyes again: your eyes of the dawn,
     your eyes fresh as the dew, your kind, ignorant, gentle eyes, so
     fond, so gay, so sad....”

She lowered her head, overcome with emotion. Mme. de la Vaudraye, who
had brought her this letter from her son and who waited for her to
finish reading it, said, rather aggressively:

“I should be glad of a word of explanation, Gilberte. Yesterday, my son
fights a duel without any adequate cause. To-day, he leaves me, without
giving me any reason. Have these two incidents anything to do with you?
You must admit their seriousness to a mother.”

Gilberte handed her the letter. Mme. de la Vaudraye read it and shrugged
her shoulders:

“Are you so very rich?”

The girl gave her another letter, received that morning, in which the
Dieppe solicitor furnished her with her quarterly statement. Mme. de la
Vaudraye started:

“Impossible! Oh, my child, you must never let Guillaume know!”

“How can I? He has gone away!”

“And you sit there and say that so quietly! Doesn’t his going distress
you? Don’t you love him?”

“Yes, I love him.”

“Then write to him.”

“Write to him?”

“Yes, tell him to come back ... tell him that his position makes no
difference to you....”

She spoke with a certain embarrassment: and this made Gilberte feel
awkward. However, she said:

“I can’t write. Guillaume alone can solve the question that lies between
him and his conscience.”

Mme. de la Vaudraye gave an impatient gesture and cried:

“You can’t write! What a ridiculous scruple! Is it any worse to write to
a young man than to go walking about the country with him, as I hear you
did yesterday? What! My son fights a duel because of you, he leaves me
because of you; and, when I, his mother, ask you ...! Well, what’s the
matter? What are you looking at me like that for?”

A chair suddenly pushed aside, an overturned flower-vase bore evidence
to Mme. de la Vaudraye’s burst of irritation. She flew out again:

“Oh, yes, it’s all very well, but one can’t stand that eternal
gentleness of yours! Here am I, telling you how wrong you are, and you
listen in such a queer way that I end by putting myself in the wrong.
One always feels with you as though one were in front of an indulgent
judge, who graciously forgives one’s faults. And yet it’s you who are at
fault!”

“Why, of course!” said Gilberte, all confusion.

“Then why do I look like a prisoner being judged?”

“Oh, but you don’t!”

“Yes, I do. It’s all very well for you to bend your head and all very
well for me to rave and yell: any one would think that I was to blame
and that you were making allowances. You must admit, it is enough to
make one lose all patience.”

Presumably, Mme. de la Vaudraye was afraid of growing still more
impatient, for she went away without another word.

Gilberte called on her, next day, and kissed her affectionately. There
was not a word said about their difference of the day before.

They saw each other every day. According to the weather, they walked in
the town or walked about the neighbourhood, leaning on each other’s arm
and heedless of any but themselves. But they invariably returned at the
same hour.

“Ah, it’s five o’clock: here are the ladies coming back!” people said.

This regularity was due to Gilberte. As soon as she was free, she went
to the ruined summer-house and sat there until dinnertime.

“But why this hurry?” asked Mme. de la Vaudraye. “You never give me a
minute over.”

“And what about my daily appointment?” said Gilberte, laughing.

“Your appointment?”

“Why, yes, with your son: what would he think of me if I were not
punctual?”

In the course of a longer excursion than usual, Mme. de la Vaudraye,
who was fond of turning the conversation on her past greatness, pointed
out the limits of the property once possessed by her ancestors. They
extended along both banks of the Varenne, as far as the spot where it
joined the Andainette.

“To say nothing of what we owned on the forest side: the Revolution
robbed us of that. Why, on the death of my father, the whole of the
valley still belonged to us! My marriage-portion included everything
down to the Bas-Moulin. And you should have seen the Logis in those
days! Such furniture! Such works of art!”

Gilberte, to humour her, asked:

“And how did you lose it?”

“Oh, it’s a long story, a heap of mysterious business-schemes in which
my poor husband, a decent man, if ever there was one, allowed himself to
be robbed by a company-promoter called Despriol. You remember that empty
house, near Notre-Dame-sur-l’Eau, which took your fancy yesterday, I
don’t quite know why? Well, that’s where Despriol and his wife lived, up
to fifteen years ago. Henriette Despriol was a charming woman; she and I
were great friends; and she used to come to the Logis when she liked ...
so did her husband, for M. de la Vaudraye was never happy out of his
sight; and I did not dream of suspecting him, for he struck me as a
good-natured, honest man and M. de la Vaudraye was careful to hide from
me the dangerous speculations into which his evil genius was dragging
him. Everything was discovered in an hour. Despriol took to flight,
after losing, or rather stealing, all that remained to us. We were
ruined.”

She paused and then continued:

“There’s worse than that. On the same evening, my dear friend Henriette
came and flung herself on her knees before me and implored me to give
her money to join her husband, who was in concealment in the
neighbourhood, and to enable them to leave the country and retrieve
their fortunes. It was a piece of brazen impudence; and I showed her the
door. Unfortunately, I left her alone, for a moment, in my bedroom. An
hour after, I saw that a box containing all my jewels had disappeared.
We rushed to her house: she was gone.”

“Did you prosecute them?”

“We notified the police, but they were never found. Five years ago, I
received a letter from Henriette in which she said, ‘The ten thousand
francs which my husband sent you this morning represent the value of the
jewels. It is the first money which we have been able to put by. I am
longing for the day when we shall be in a position to settle with you
altogether and when I shall have the right to beg your forgiveness for
all the harm that we have done you. Until that day comes there will be
no rest for your repentant friend.”

“And since then ...?”

“Since then, I have received another letter, a few months ago, in which
she told me that her husband was dead and that she was on her way to me
with all the money she owed me.”

“Well?”

“Nothing but lies! Nobody came. Do people like that come and pay back
the money they have stolen! No, they were a couple of thieves. You ask
anybody at Domfront about M. and Mme. Despriol: a nice reputation they
left behind them! If either of them thought of coming back here, they’d
be stoned in the streets! Henriette indeed! Why, I should spit in her
face, that I would, the sneak, the hypocrite!...”

She uttered those words with an accent of implacable hatred charged with
all the rancour of those fifteen years of poverty and privation.
Gilberte shuddered. The evil expression on that face filled her with a
sort of repugnance. Nevertheless, she took Mme. de la Vaudraye’s hand
and, raising it to her lips, murmured:

“You poor dear!”

And she did this not designedly, because it was Guillaume’s mother whom
she was conciliating, but from an undefined and all-powerful instinct
that compelled her to be kind to this humiliated and disappointed woman.

It was the same instinct which had guided her hitherto and which made
her still more attentive and affectionate in the days that followed,
notwithstanding a certain sense of constraint which she felt in Mme. de
la Vaudraye’s presence. She knew no greater pleasure than to smooth the
wrinkles from those sullen features at the moment when they were most
firmly set; and to do this she employed all sorts of childish rogueries:

“Come, try hard and laugh.... There, you have laughed!”

Mme. de la Vaudraye was touched by all this charm of manner. It made
her neglect the artificial plan of conduct which she had arranged to
captivate the girl: she forgot to conceal her faults, she even became
natural and spontaneous.

One day, after something that Gilberte had said, with a sudden movement
she drew the girl to her:

“Oh, my darling, what a treasure of a wife you would make!”

Gilberte smiled:

“Indeed! How do I know that you would have me for a daughter!...
However, we shall soon see ... perhaps to-morrow....”

“To-morrow?”

“Why, of course! Isn’t this the day when Guillaume is coming to the
trysting-place where I wait for him every day?”

“Guillaume? I had a letter from him this morning from Paris. Besides, I
know him; when he has made up his mind....”

Gilberte looked at her watch:

“Five o’clock. Suppose he were there now!... Ah, I have a feeling that
he is there to-day, that I shall see him!... Good-bye till to-morrow.”

She hastened away swiftly, leaving her companion speechless. Hope filled
her breast, a hope each time disappointed, but never discouraged.

“Mme. Armand is coming back alone this afternoon,” said the people at
Domfront. “What a hurry she’s in!”

She crossed the threshold of the Logis without stopping and went
straight to the summer-house. Her eyes longed to pierce the screen of
foliage that hid the hill from sight. She had not a doubt that he was
there; and, at the same time, she felt the madness of her certainty.

She arrived. Her glance at once swept the rocks. He was there.

She was on the point of throwing him handfuls of kisses, or else of
kneeling down and stretching out her arms to him across space, but she
saw him running down the slope and she herself started running towards
him, as fast as she could.

She arrived all out of breath at the bottom of the garden, broke down
the little wooden gate, which was slow in opening, and sprang into the
road at the moment when Guillaume crossed the bridge:

“Gilberte!”

“Guillaume!”

They assured themselves with a glance that nothing was changed in either
of them and then silently followed the road that skirts the Varenne.
They dared not speak, overcome with the importance of the words which
they were about to pronounce. Besides, excitement gripped them by the
throat.

Thus they arrived at Notre-Dame-sur-l’Eau, the old Norman chapel which
is so prettily situated on the river-bank.

Leaning on the balustrade above the water flowing through the arches of
the bridge, they revelled in the delight of dreaming side by side. Then
Guillaume said:

“It was more than I could bear. I wanted to see you, if only for a few
minutes ... and to gather fresh courage....”

She asked, in a voice that did not sound like her own:

“Then ... you are going back?...”

“I intended to ... but I can’t now.... I can’t now....”

He continued, almost in a whisper:

“It’s not weakness. But I am seeing you; and to see you is to see things
and ideas as they are. You flood them with the light which is in you and
which springs from you. Yes, I tried to escape the temptation and I had
a wild desire to work in solitude, so as to achieve the wealth and fame
that would have permitted me to marry you. And now ... and now I see
that it is all madness. Why suffer uselessly? Let us struggle together,
Gilberte. I can do nothing without you ... I am too much in love with
you.”

“And your scruples?” she asked, maliciously.

“What do wealth and poverty matter? They are words to which I was able
to attach a certain value when away from you in writing to you. But,
when I am near you, it seems to me that they mean nothing. A man has no
right to order his life by such empty phrases.... Oh, Gilberte, you put
everything in its right proportion, you are truth itself, your love
gives certainty and peace! Such as I am, I am worthy of you, because you
love me....”

She gave him her hand. He asked:

“You are not angry with me?”

“For going away, Guillaume? No, I was so sure that you would come
back!”




IX

AFFIANCED


On the next afternoon, Adèle burst into the room where Gilberte was
sitting after lunch:

“M’am, there’s Mme. de la Vaudraye and her son turning into the square.
Am I to let them in?”

“Yes, certainly, I am expecting them.”

“Then it’s true what Mme. Duval says, that you’re going to marry M.
Guillaume, ma’am?”

“Well, suppose I am?”

“Oh, as far as M. Guillaume’s concerned, I’ve nothing to say! But Mme.
de la Vaudraye as your mother-in-law! If you want to know, ma’am, I’d
rather....”

The front-bell rang; and she went to the door looking very cross.

Gilberte shot a glance at the glass over the mantel-piece, pushed a curl
into place and nervously made a change in the flowers in the vases,
bunches of roses which she had gathered herself. Adèle showed in the
mother and son.

Mme. de la Vaudraye was radiant. A moment before, in the main street,
the mere sight of her silk dress, her ceremonious walk and her
triumphant expression must have told the inhabitants of Domfront the
exact nature of her errand.

She entered with the ease of one who is quite at home. Her way of
sitting down showed that she was definitely and blissfully taking
possession. There was none of the stiffness, none of the preliminary
commonplaces that usually mark this sort of interview. Mme. de la
Vaudraye was much too eager to come to the point:

“My dear Gilberte, I wish to ask your hand for my son Guillaume.”

All their love, all the unspeakable happiness of their souls, all their
gratitude, all their faith in the future was contained in the glance
exchanged by Guillaume and Gilberte. Nothing remained of the irritation
which his mother’s air of victory caused him, nothing remained of the
anxiety which the other felt at this solemn hour.

Mme. de la Vaudraye did not even wait to hear the answer.

“First of all, my dear child, let me speak to you as a friend and as a
woman of experience, who knows only too well, by what she herself has
been through, that happiness in married life is based upon material
prosperity. You know, don’t you, how Guillaume and I are placed as
regards money? On the death of my poor husband....”

Guillaume rose and walked to the open window, as though bored beforehand
by what was coming. Gilberte felt very much inclined to join him and to
leave Mme. de la Vaudraye to fight out with herself the question of the
material prosperity on which married bliss is based. But the older
woman’s imperious eye nailed her to her chair; and, nodding her head at
intervals, by way of assent, she had to listen to a long speech in which
strange phrases like separate and common property, joint estate and
settlements kept on recurring.

“That will do nicely,” she said, with an air of deliberation, though she
did not understand a single word of what was said.

“Are we agreed?”

“Quite, madame.”

“Well, children, kiss each other and bless you!”

Guillaume stepped forward and his outstretched arms closed round
Gilberte. He kissed her forehead, kissed her eyes. She released herself,
blushing, and said:

“It is my first kiss, Guillaume.”

He felt a momentary bitterness:

“Your first ... from me.”

She smiled:

“A girl must not receive a kiss from any but the man she is engaged to
... and are you not the first, the only one?”

“What do you mean, Gilberte?”

“I mean, Guillaume,” she said, in accents throbbing with her heart’s
gladness, “I mean that I am not a widow, that I have never been married,
that I called myself a married woman in the hope of escaping attention
and that no such person as Mme. Armand exists.”

Guillaume was trembling with emotion. He understood, yet refused to
admit the truth, so great would have been the anguish of a mistake:

“No, no, I dare not believe it ... you, a girl, unmarried!”

“What is there so extraordinary in that?”

“Oh, Gilberte!”

He had seized her hands and stood gazing at her in ecstasy.

She whispered:

“I was sure that you would be delighted.”

“It is something more than delight. You seem to me even more beautiful
and even more innocent and sacred. I do not love you any better, but I
love you differently.”

And he continued:

“Is it really possible? Is there no one in your past? Is there not even
that shadow on my happiness?”

“My whole past is you, Guillaume.”

Mme. de la Vaudraye came up to them. They had forgotten all about her;
and her appearance gave them an impression that was all the more painful
inasmuch as the sudden gravity of her features was in direct contrast
with their own rapture. She said to Gilberte:

“If Mme. Armand does not exist, then whom is my son marrying?”

“Well, Gilberte....”

“Gilberte whom?”

“Gilberte Me,” replied the girl, trying to speak playfully, but
half-uneasy at heart.

“Come, child, that’s not enough. You must have a surname?...”

“I suppose so....”

“What was your father’s name? Your mother’s?”

“I don’t know.”

Mme. de la Vaudraye drew herself up to the full length of her angular
figure. It was as though she were learning some terrible event, a
catastrophe. Gilberte caught sight of Guillaume’s pallor and suddenly
understood what she had never even half-realized, the danger of her
irregular position where a woman like Mme. de la Vaudraye was concerned.
She shook with terror.

Guillaume interposed gently:

“Don’t upset yourself, Gilberte. I need not say how little importance I
attach to all this; but mother does not look at things from my point of
view. Let us hear the facts.”

Gilberte, without entering into details, told of the death of her
mother, the loss of the family-papers and the whole chapter of accidents
which had prevented her from penetrating the mystery that surrounded
her. As she went on, her voice lost its assurance. All this story,
which, until then, she had simply regarded as a source of petty worries,
now, under Mme. de la Vaudraye’s stern eye, appeared to her the
abominable story of a worthless creature. To be without a name! She felt
as much ashamed of herself as though they had made the unexpected
discovery that she had an ear missing, or a piece of one cheek. And yet,
in the silence that followed on her recital she sought in vain for the
crime which she had committed, for the crime of which she was held
guilty.

“Well, mother,” said Guillaume, “there’s nothing serious in that.”

“Nothing serious!” sneered Mme. de la Vaudraye.

All her little middle-class, provincial feelings were outraged by this
unforeseen revelation. The pride of the La Vaudrayes cried aloud within
her. What would people say at Domfront if a La Vaudraye married a girl
without a name, a foundling, an adventuress, in fact! She pictured the
tittletattle, the sidelong allusions, the condolences with which she
would be overwhelmed.

“My poor friend, how very unpleasant for you!... Of course, I knew there
was something suspicious about her, for, after all....”

And they would say, among themselves:

“No name? Nonsense! When people haven’t a name, it’s because it’s to
their interest not to have one, because they are hiding their real
name.”

She did not take the trouble to put it politely. Bluntly, she declared:

“The marriage is out of the question. It will not take place.”

Guillaume protested indignantly:

“Out of the question! And why, pray?”

“Can’t you see that for yourself? I’m surprised at your asking!”

“I insist on knowing, as Gilberte’s affianced husband.”

“Gilberte’s husband! People don’t marry....”

“Silence, mother!”

He was standing before her, with his features convulsed. Another word
and he would have closed her lips by mean force. She was afraid of him.
He went on, dropping his voice:

“You are right, we had better not continue this explanation in her
presence. Any words other than words of veneration I look upon as an
insult to the girl I love.”

He pushed her towards the door sternly. But Gilberte barred their road:

“No, Guillaume, not like that.... If we must part, let it not be with
angry words.... I love both of you too well, yes, both of you, madame,”
she declared, in the voice that no one could resist.

Her gentleness was stronger than Guillaume’s violence. He made no
further movement. Mme. de la Vaudraye allowed herself to be led back
into the room. Gilberte made her sit down and knelt beside her:

“Act as your conscience tells you, but, please, without any bitterness
against me.... Whatever you decide to do, do not let me lose your
affection.”

There may have been a sort of revenge on Gilberte in Mme. de la
Vaudraye’s unbending attitude. She rejoiced to see this child, who had
always dominated her by her goodness and candour, on her knees before
her, while she, the judge, looked down from her moral pedestal and put
her to confusion from the heights of her respectability.

She did not reply. Gilberte continued:

“You remember our walk, a little while ago, when you showed me the
former boundaries of your property.... Well, I bought it all up ... in
order to give it back to you. I hoped to bring you back here, to this
house which belongs to you. Everything is yours, you would have managed
and disposed of everything, you would have been the absolute mistress,
answerable to no one, you would have resumed your proper place at
Domfront, the Logis would have become what it used to be....”

A gleam flashed through Mme. de la Vaudraye’s eyes, but she restrained
herself. The same inflexible will contracted her face into a hard and
stiff mask. Coldly, she said:

“I am exceedingly sorry that all these fine plans cannot be realized,
but it is not my fault.... Make enquiries.... Who knows ...? Perhaps you
will succeed in finding out the indispensable truth.”

Gilberte, in her despair, was nearly flinging her arms round her neck
and saying:

“Stay here, please.... Be to me the mother whom I have lost.... I will
love you like a daughter....”

But Guillaume prevented her:

“Why humiliate yourself, Gilberte?... If my mother will not consent....”

“Well?”

“Well, are we not free?”

“No, Guillaume,” she answered, firmly, “I will not marry you except with
your mother’s entire approval.”

He turned pale and murmured:

“But ... we shall see each other....”

“We shall not see each other. We can only see each other by stealth; and
that is unworthy of us.”

“Suppose I meet you....”

“I shall not leave the Logis.”

“But....”

“We will wait, Guillaume. Am I not your promised bride?”

He bowed. His mother went out. He followed her.

And Gilberte felt as though she had never been so lonely in her life.




X

THE DESERTED HOUSE


Next day, Gilberte received the following letter from Maître Dufornéril,
her solicitor at Dieppe:

     “MADEMOISELLE,

     “I have just received your telegram asking me where we stand in the
     matter of our enquiries. I have already given you the information
     which I obtained regarding your life and that of your parents at
     Liverpool, although this, unfortunately, told us nothing new. M.
     Kellner, which was the name under which your father made his
     fortune at Liverpool, left none but pleasant memories behind him in
     the commercial world of that city. On the other hand, no one knew
     anything of his private life or of his antecedents. It was not
     even known that he was married; and this fully bears out what you
     told me of the retired existence which your mother and yourself
     used to lead.

     “I was therefore obliged to pursue our investigations to Berlin,
     which takes us six years further back. Your father at that time
     called himself M. Dumas. And here we have evidence that a fire
     broke out on the 15th of October 18--in the warehouse of M. Dumas,
     a bonder of Anjou wines, in the Frischwasserstrasse. Among the
     rooms completely destroyed was that which M. Dumas, who was at the
     same time a general agent, used as an office in which to see his
     clients, most of whom were countrymen of his own. M. Dumas made an
     affidavit from which it appears that all his papers were burnt.

     “On this side, consequently, we arrive at a very unfortunate
     certainty: your family-papers are no longer in existence; that is
     clear. We have therefore to trace your parents back to the time of
     their departure from France. Once we have done this and discovered
     the town in which they used to live, it will be easy, by
     advertising, to find out who you really are.

     “Your father had in his employment, in Berlin, a Frenchman of the
     name of Renaudeau, whom he appears to have trusted absolutely and
     to have treated, according to the neighbours, as a friend of long
     standing. When he left Berlin, he made over his business to
     Renaudeau. Next year, Renaudeau went bankrupt. But he is believed
     to be at Hamburg. I have written to the French consul there; and I
     will let you know as soon as I hear from him.”

Day after day went by, days like those which followed on her arrival at
Domfront. Gilberte once more became the recluse to whom none had access
save the poor and destitute of the countryside; and, though they still
spoke of her as _la Bonne Demoiselle_ of the Logis and blessed her for
her charity, it might well be that they no longer took away with them
that impression of comfort which they welcomed no less than the alms.
How could she have consoled them, she who herself was yearning for
consolation?

However, she did not give up all hope. Gilberte had one of those rather
passive natures which, in happy hours, overflow with generous gladness,
but which, at times of trial, fall back upon themselves and live in that
kind of quiet contemplation which is as it were a patient expectation.
Mastering her sorrow and checking any signs of rebellion or distress,
she appeared less sensitive than others to the most cruel blows with
which fate overwhelmed her and, through every obstacle and every
vicissitude, she pursued her inward dream, sad or joyous, bright or
gloomy, but always built up of love and kindness.

The most appalling time was the close of day. Night fell late at that
time of the year; and it would have been sweet indeed to go down to the
summer-house after dinner. She had not a doubt but that Guillaume was
regular in his attendance at their former trysting-place. He must be
stretching out his arms to her now, calling her, entreating her,
reproaching her: oh, the torture of not being able to go to him!

She never ceased thinking of him. The memories of their common past
formed the only charm of the present; and, by one of love’s illusions,
she made her own memories begin on the very day on which Guillaume’s
began. And so she remembered the minute when he had caught her raising
her mourning-veil in the garden by the ruins. She remembered the moment
when, hiding behind a curtain, he had come near to her for the first
time. Had she not always loved him? Why had she, from the first and
despite Guillaume’s deliberate rebuffs, sought to tame him, as Mme. de
la Vaudraye called it, and to win his liking? Why also her impulse of
friendship towards the mysterious unknown?

Gilberte took little or no heed of what the town said of all these
happenings, having asked Adèle not to tell her: an order which the
unfortunate servant found great difficulty in obeying! Domfront was
bubbling and seething with comments! For, after all, there was this
undeniable fact: in the sight of the whole world, as everybody could
bear witness, a formal proposal had been made for Gilberte’s hand in
marriage; and it resulted in a breach between the La Vaudrayes and Mme.
Armand. A complete breach! For they no longer even saw one another. And
the inexplicable thing was that, since that famous afternoon, Mme.
Armand had not once left the Logis.

What was underneath it all? From which side did the breach come? A score
of contradictory versions went the round of the town, but none of them
bore the marks of indisputable authenticity upon which the
ever-scrupulous world insists before accepting a piece of gossip as
fact. As for Mme. Duval, she was in a desperate plight. Pressed with
questions, she was reluctantly compelled to admit that she knew nothing.

After the first fortnight, Gilberte, who dared not walk in her garden,
ventured to go out once or twice, but only at times and in directions
where she ran no risk of meeting people. Generally in the early morning,
she would slip out by a side-door and make her way down to the river by
the most shady and roundabout paths of the wood skirting the Logis.

Her almost daily destination was the little chapel of
Notre-Dame-sur-l’Eau. It was here that she had had her last interview
with Guillaume. It was a peaceful spot, where she loved to dream. One
day, when she was coming back by a rambling way, she passed the house
which was once tenanted by those Despriols who had brought about M. and
Mme. de la Vaudrayes’ ruin. The rusty bars of the gate seemed crumbling
to pieces. A tangle of weeds and brambles overran the garden. The front
of the house was cracking; the slates of the roof were green; the
windows were full of swallows’ nests. Everything spoke of desertion and
neglect. Nevertheless, Gilberte felt drawn to it.

The gate resisted her efforts and she walked round the garden-wall,
feeling sure that she would find a door near a corner which she saw a
little way off. She did find one; and it was open, as was the door at
the top of the steps leading up to the house.

She had no sooner gone inside than the impression which the old house
had made upon her became so distinct as to awaken recognition. It was
that curious impression which we sometimes receive in the presence of
scenes which we are sure that we have never looked upon and which
nevertheless we seem to have always known. It is impossible that we
should ever have visited a certain town; and yet the street in which we
are is quite familiar to us: we have seen this shop before, that
sign-board, this gable, that turning. Where and when? In what bygone
existence? Or is it only an illusion awakened in our brain by a series
of similar pictures?

“This is the drawing-room,” said Gilberte, before opening the door.

And she amused herself by likewise pointing out, with absolute
conviction, the kitchen and the dining-room.

But her astonishment was great indeed when, on the first floor, she
entered a large room hung with grey wall-paper, on which birds and
butterflies flitted amongst blue flowers. Where had she seen those
flowers, those butterflies, those birds before?

She gave a start: in a corner, on the dusty floor, lay a doll, the last
stranded relic of all that had once filled the house. And Gilberte knew
that doll, knew it beyond a doubt.

She picked it up and, at the first touch of it, was seized with an
extraordinary emotion, as though it had been a doll of her childhood, a
doll with which she had played at the age of three or four, one of those
dolls which little girls treat as babies, lavishing on them all the
devotion, the infinite care, the tenderness, the pride and the anxiety
of the future mother. And she saw this one, this poor, wretched rag of a
doll, with no clothes and only half a head, she saw it, or rather
recalled it, clad in a dress of orange silk and a green shawl, with
bronze shoes on its feet, a silver chain round its neck and the most
wonderful mop of yellow hair upon its head.

She held it for a long time; and it seemed to her that her hands were
used to that clumsy body and to the badly-jointed arms and legs. Nothing
about the doll disgusted her. She felt as if she could kiss the little
porcelain forehead, the prim, painted eyebrows, the chubby cheeks.

There was a faint sound behind her. She turned round and saw a
dirty-looking woman with curiously staring eyes and great wisps of
white hair all round her head. She was showing her teeth in a fixed and
silent laugh. On the linen rag that did duty as a neckerchief hung a
queer necklace made of chips of glass, pebbles, corks and twisted grass.

Suddenly the face became contracted with rage: its owner had caught
sight of the doll. She ran up to Gilberte, snatched it from her hands
and brandished it as though she would have struck the girl with it. But
the doll fell to the ground, the threatening gesture ended in an
attitude of hesitation and the old woman, with her body bent forward and
her eyes staring, gazed at Gilberte.

Gilberte was frightened at first, but became gradually reassured under
this steady gaze in which she seemed to feel an ardent and curious
affection. She smiled at the old woman, who gave a silent laugh, picked
up the doll and handed it to her humbly and gently. Gilberte refused to
take it and the old woman grasped her hand and led her to the second
floor, to a cupboard crammed with child’s shoes, rattles, broken toys, a
little cradle, a chair on wheels and showed them to her with an air of
saying:

“Pick where you like, take what you like; I give them to you.”

But none of these things tempted Gilberte. Then the old woman took her
down to the garden, led her to an acacia-tree, to a wooden bench, to
what remained of a dovecote and, at each halt, questioned her with her
eager eyes.

At last, Gilberte felt weary; little by little, since the woman’s
arrival, the deserted house had lost its mysterious charm for her; and
she began to think of going. Thereupon the old crone, anticipating her
wishes, took a key from her pocket and opened the rusty gate. She
stooped, as Gilberte went out, and kissed the hem of her dress.

Turning round, a few minutes after, Gilberte saw her standing in the
middle of the road, making signs to her.

When she returned to the Logis, she told her adventure to Adèle, who
exclaimed:

“Why, it must have been Désirée, the Despriols’ old nurse! She is a poor
old madwoman, but quite harmless, and lives near Notre-Dame-sur-l’Eau.
She does nothing but wander round the house where she was a servant. She
has been mad for quite two years, ever since the death of her husband
and her three sons. It came upon her all of a sudden....”

“But had the Despriols a child?” asked Gilberte.

“I should think so! A little girl who might have been three or four
years old at the time when they went away: a dear little duck; and her
nurse adored her. It broke the poor thing’s heart to part with her.
Since she went mad, she thinks oftener of the baby than of her own three
sons. They did say that she heard about the child and that Mme. Despriol
used to write to her.”

“Did you know this Mme. Despriol, Adèle?”

“That I did, at Mme. de la Vaudraye’s, when they lived here.... She was
a very nice lady, so cheerful and pleasant; good-looking, too, but,
worse luck, so weak with her husband that he did as he liked with her.”

“Mme. de la Vaudraye told me something about some jewels....”

“Oh, that was quite true! There’s no denying it: a thief she was ... and
Mme. de la Vaudraye has good reason not to love her. And how she does
detest her! And then she was jealous of M. de la Vaudraye, who ventured
to flirt just the least bit with Mme. Despriol. You can imagine how mad
Mme. de la Vaudraye was! She turns pale to this day, if you mention
Henriette Despriol’s name....”

A few days later, Gilberte received another letter from Maître
Dufornéril:

     “MADEMOISELLE,

     “We are making headway with our enquiries and I hope soon to send
     you the news of our success. This Renaudeau who took over M. Dumas’
     business in Berlin is, as we thought, at Hamburg. He has seen the
     consul and declares that he knew your father for many years, going
     back to the date when he was still living in France. He refuses,
     for the present, to reveal M. Dumas’ real name and antecedents; but
     I have no doubt that this Renaudeau, who is in a state of the
     greatest poverty, will yield to certain arguments.

     “I think I may safely say, therefore, that my next letter will
     inform you of the name of your parents and the place at which you
     were born....”




XI

GILBERTE’S NAME


Gilberte, who was less proof against joy than sorrow, awaited her
solicitor’s promised letter with feverish impatience. Another four or
five days, a week perhaps; and the mystery would be cleared up and the
only obstacle to her marriage swept away.

She kept more and more indoors. What was the use of short, stealthy
walks, when her imagination, which was now unfettered, took her across
the immensity of the world, on Guillaume’s arm, under Guillaume’s eyes?
She tried to read novels, to calm her excitement. But what are
fictitious adventures worth at a time when our own destiny is on the
point of fulfilment and when it is to be fulfilled in cloudless
happiness? The one and only adventure was that which was leading her
towards Guillaume. The story began and ended with Guillaume. Guillaume
was its sole hero.

“It will come to-morrow,” she said, each day, with the fixed intention
of sending the letter, the moment she received it, to Mme. de la
Vaudraye.

The morning came and the afternoon and brought no letter. She felt not
the least disappointment:

“It will come to-morrow,” she thought, all a-quiver with hope.

The postman became a person of importance in her eyes, a gentleman worth
considering. She shot her prettiest smiles at him, as though she were
trying to win his confidence and to persuade him that he must have a
letter for her in his bag.

Adèle was enraptured:

“Oh, ma’am, you’re becoming as you used to be! And high time too! Yes, I
was growing uneasy at seeing you always sad, taking no interest in
things and looking so pale. But, there, you’re right: there’s as good
fish in the sea as ever came out of it!”

Released from her silence, Adèle was at last able to repeat all that
Domfront had said about the breach and all that was happening now. And
Gilberte learnt that Mme. de la Vaudraye’s _salon_, after closing for
three weeks, had reopened. M. Beaufrelant and M. le Hourteulx had been
invited. Mme. Duval even predicted an approaching reconciliation with
the younger Simare, whose father had never ceased pleading in his
favour. At the last reception, the duet from _Mireille_, as sung by M.
Lartiste the elder and Mle. du Bocage, both of whom were making great
progress, had been vigorously applauded. But the chief thing was the
transformation undergone by Guillaume, whom everybody considered changed
for the better.

“They can’t get over it,” said Adèle. “I hear that he is the life and
soul of the party and so amiable and so polite: just like a proper
young man. He seems on the best of terms with his mother. The young
ladies are all gone on him. Bless my soul, he’s a good-looking lad ...
and it won’t take long before he’s turned all their heads....”

Gilberte reflected:

“He’s quite right to make himself amiable. It’s the only way to get
round his mother.”

Nevertheless, she had to make a certain effort to look upon this as the
only explanation of Guillaume’s conduct.

Two more days followed without a letter. Then, one morning, Adèle came
back from her shopping:

“Here’s a bit of news!” she said. “There’s no harm in telling you, now
that you’ve got over things. M. Guillaume is engaged to the eldest
Charmeron girl.”

Gilberte burst out laughing:

“It’s one of Mme. Duval’s matches!”

“No, no, I hear it from others as well: the Bottentuits’ servant told
me; so did M. Beaufrelant’s gardener. Mme. de la Vaudraye announced it
last night when every one was there.”

Not for a moment did Gilberte admit the possibility of so great a
perfidy. Nothing evil could ever come from within her: no suspicions, no
doubts, no base thoughts; and whatever came from without broke against
her love like impotent waves. How could she have pictured treachery, who
did not know that treachery existed?

She was therefore very cheerful all day long. Nevertheless, at sunset,
an irresistible force drew her to the ruined summer-house. Guillaume was
not among the rocks in the valley.

Nor did she see him the next day. That night, she had a touch of fever
and her mind wandered a little, mingling the picture of Guillaume with
that of Mlle. Charmeron.

She laughed merrily at all this on waking. Nothing could touch her faith
in her lover. She was as sure of him as of herself.

She rose in good spirits, resolved to be happy came what might. And she
was happy: a plucky creature judging others by her own lofty standards,
whose nerves and woman’s instinct may be alarmed for a moment, without
allowing a breath to disturb the serenity of her soul.

She played and sang until lunch-time. After lunch, she strolled in her
garden and picked some flowers. When she went in, she found Guillaume
waiting for her in the drawing-room:

“You ... you ...!” she murmured, half-swooning with emotion.

She was obliged to sit down and they remained at some distance from each
other, not daring to raise their eyes. It seemed to Gilberte as though
her whole life would not be enough to take in all the joy that wrapped
her round. How right had she been to be happy in spite of all things and
to prepare herself for this greater happiness, which she could never
have borne, had she been sad and suspicious.

Guillaume asked:

“Did you not meet my mother? She is looking for you in the garden.”

“Is your mother here?”

“Oh, Gilberte, would I have come without her, when I would not even go
over there, among the rocks, for fear of displeasing you?”

She recalled her disappointment of the last evening and the evening
before and was on the point of accusing herself ... but of what? Had she
lent a willing ear to the calumnies of the town? She said, simply:

“I am glad of what you have done for Mme. de la Vaudraye.”

“What have I done?”

“Was it not a sacrifice to be at her parties?”

He went up to Gilberte:

“A sacrifice? Not at all.... Ah, that’s because you don’t know what has
happened during the last few days!... Why, I am prepared to do all that
she wishes and to take an interest in all that interests her and to
like everything that she likes!... If you only knew, Gilberte.... Listen
... or rather, no, I prefer that she should tell you....”

“Oh,” cried Gilberte, “if they are hopeful words, precious words, why
not say them yourself, Guillaume? Will they not be sweeter if I hear
them from your lips? Speak, Guillaume ... I want them to be associated
in my memory with the sound of your voice ... please, please....”

She besought him with her gentle, loving smile. He at once said:

“Very well, Gilberte, I will.”

He was interrupted by Adèle, bringing in a letter on a tray. Gilberte
took the letter and, while the servant was leaving the room,
mechanically cast her eyes upon the postmark. A cry escaped her:

“Guillaume!”

Her fingers trembled. She could only whisper:

“A letter from Dieppe ... from my solicitor.... Oh, I was waiting for it
so anxiously!... Think, Guillaume: it brings me a name ... nothing can
separate us now....”

The excitement was too much for her. She felt herself small and feeble
in the grip of an over-great happiness. And, covering her face with her
crossed hands, as was her wont at moments of perturbation, she wept
tears of delight.

Some minutes passed in silence. She heard Guillaume open the
garden-door. Steps approached, some one sat down beside her, a hand
unlocked her fingers: it was Mme. de la Vaudraye.

She shrank back imperceptibly. But Mme. de la Vaudraye said:

“Gilberte, are you afraid of me?”

And the voice was so gentle that Gilberte was quite stirred. She looked
at her through her tears and hardly recognized her. Her features had
lost their customary hardness, her countenance the expression of
implacable pride that deprived it of all its charm. And this charm now
showed itself in the eyes, which had lost their severity, in the
pathetic wrinkles of the forehead, in all that sad and withered face.

“Gilberte, you wished to be my daughter: do you wish it still?”

She had no time to reply. Guillaume had rushed up to both of them and
was kissing them by turns. And he said, fervently:

“Let us love her, Gilberte. We owe her the greatest gratitude for what
she is doing. It means the sacrifice of her most cherished ideas and she
has consented to that sacrifice of her own accord.”

“Come, Guillaume, don’t make me out better than I am!” protested Mme. de
la Vaudraye, in a playful tone. “Are you quite sure that I have not
merely yielded to sordid motives? If Gilberte had been a poor girl,
without any money....”

“Oh, madame,” said Gilberte, “that counts for so little!”

“Yes, with you and Guillaume, who are young and think only of your
happiness, but not with me, who have suffered so much from the change in
my fortunes. I can’t help it: one cannot alter at my age; I have a name
of which I am very vain; and my dream has always been to restore it to
all its brilliancy.”

She playfully stroked Gilberte’s hair:

“And think of all my blandishments, from the very beginning, Mme.
Armand! You can’t say that I wasn’t clever in getting round you and
making you do what I wanted! Well, then, one day, you tell me that you
have bought up my family estates and you offer to reinstate me as
mistress of the Logis. How could I have the courage to refuse?”

She displayed a sort of unspoken wish to make amends to Gilberte, a wish
which her pride prevented her from revealing as openly as her heart
would have prompted her, but which, nevertheless, appeared in her manner
of confessing, as though in fun, the shabby side of her behaviour.
Gilberte had too much delicacy of mind to take pleasure in this
admission and replied:

“It’s your son’s happiness which you have not had the courage to reject.
It is so easy to tell that all your ambitions and all your hopes are
only for him.”

But Guillaume was less indulgent and exclaimed:

“Really, mother, one would think that you were trying to cheapen your
consent! Come, tell her of our talks of the past fortnight, tell her
that you know the whole story of our love and that you understand
Gilberte, as she deserves, and that that is why you agree.”

Mme. de la Vaudraye made a last stand. It was the final effort of her
vanity. She seemed undecided, bewildered, staggering, like one trying to
keep her footing before falling; and then, suddenly vanquished, she
took Gilberte in her arms:

“Yes, child, yes, it was you who conquered me ... I have come to you not
because you are rich and generous, but because you are good and sincere
and the noblest creature that ever lived.... Yes, I have thought of the
future, from the start, and I think of it still; but, also from the
start, your goodness has been working on me as on every one else. I
loved you apart from any sort of calculation. And, after refusing my
consent, it was no use my heaping up reasons to confirm me in my
resolve: I could only remember your dear gentleness, your innocence,
your childlike simplicity.”

“Oh,” whispered Gilberte, “how happy you make me!”

“You shall always be happy, child, where it depends on me: that I
promise you.... As for Guillaume, oh, if you knew how he speaks of his
sweetheart! I know you now as well as he does. But did I need his words
in order to know you? What he feels in you, that delicate bloom and
innocence, I have always felt. And I know all the power of your eyes:
they bring purity and peace ... one is better for looking at them ...
one sees more clearly....”

Gilberte, in her confusion, nestled her head against the friendly
shoulder. She was delaying, as a joy in reserve, the news of her
recovered name; and the thought of the pleasure which she held in store
gave her tiny thrills of impatience. She said, in a whisper:

“Then ... my name ... my past....”

“Rubbish!” cried Mme. de la Vaudraye. “What did all that matter where
you were concerned, my innocent Gilberte? Those prejudices fade away
into nothing when we look at them with your eyes and judge them with
your candour.”

“Do you mean that?” asked the girl, releasing herself and looking at her
with a radiant air. “Have you no regrets?”

“None at all.”

“Then read this letter, which has just come: it will tell you the secret
... I too have a family.... Ah, madame, you will have no need to blush
for me!”

Mme. de la Vaudraye did not at first understand; then, when Gilberte had
told her of the search conducted by the solicitor, she could not conceal
her satisfaction:

“So you have succeeded? Oh, I am glad!... Why should I deny it? I was
bothered in advance about what other people would say: pardon my
weakness, I can confess it now that I have accepted you as a daughter
before knowing that your parents were worthy of you. The fear that they
might not be was the only obstacle; and that was irrevocable. But I
overcame that fear. Something to boast of, was it not? As though it were
difficult to know them, when one knows you!”

She took the letter, felt it and said:

“We shall soon learn the name of two good people. Your father must have
had your fascination, Gilberte; and your mother: I picture your mother
as an exquisite, charming creature like yourself.... Did you love her
very much?”

“More than my life, madame.”

“Here, Guillaume, read it out.”

Guillaume took and opened the envelope. As he was unfolding the letter
which it contained, he had a momentary hesitation.

“Why, what’s the matter?” asked Mme. de la Vaudraye.

“Nothing,” he said, presently.

And he unfolded the letter.

They were there, all three of them, affected in different ways, but
anxious and even a little timorous, as we are at the approach of the
solemn events of our lives, even when we expect nothing from them but
pleasure and satisfaction.

“Well?” asked Gilberte, who was certainly the least excited of the
three.

Guillaume made up his mind and read, aloud:

     “MADEMOISELLE,

     “As I expected, our friend Renaudeau did not persist in his silence
     very long and, without further procrastination, has told us as much
     of your father’s story as interests you. We now know that, at the
     time when he was living in France....”

Guillaume stopped. He hesitated once more and the letter fell from his
hands to his knees.

Mme. de la Vaudraye grew impatient:

“What are you thinking of, my boy?”

He replied, in a dreamy voice:

“I am thinking that we are about to violate the secret of two persons
who must surely have had their reasons for keeping it so carefully. They
may have been the offspring of two rival families, or a pair of lovers
who were kept apart by convention, but whose hearts drew them together.
Who can tell? In any case, don’t you think that their secret belongs to
them and that there is no reason that authorizes us to violate it?”

“What do you mean?”

“Oh, mother, tell me what reasons you can have, tell me before that
angel who is listening to us! You treated them as rubbish just now: have
they become graver reasons since? State them: express your fear of
public opinion, your dread of evil tongues, your horror of comment; and,
as you do so, look into that pair of child-eyes and ask yourself if they
understand what you are saying.”

She protested feebly:

“What a strange wish, Guillaume! There is something which you are
keeping back.”

“Yes,” he cried, rising from his chair, “there is something else which I
do not see clearly.... It is my love that objects.... I don’t want to
lift the veil that shrouds Gilberte.... I prefer her so.... She is more
mine like this....”

He was walking up and down excitedly. Gilberte held out her arms to him.
He flung himself on his knees before her:

“Gilberte, I beseech you, remain for me the dear unknown whom I loved
from the first day that I saw her. I do not know what prompts me to beg
this of you, but I want you to give me the intense joy of feeling that
you exist only through me, that you are commencing your life with me,
that you are heaping still more darkness upon your past so that your
eyes may be obliged to turn still more towards the future. Be the
unknown lady of the Logis. Be the unknown who mingled her dreams with
mine, the dear unknown who came from I know not where, but who came to
me, of that I am certain.”

She hung on his words. He stammered, incoherently:

“Oh, you will do it ... I feel it!... And yet, Gilberte, listen ... the
secret is yours ... you yourself have the right to know....”

She answered, with a smile that lifted him into the seventh heaven:

“Guillaume, I do not want to know what you will not know.... Besides, it
matters so little! I was only happy for your mother’s sake.”

He bent his head and kissed her hands. Presently, they heard Mme. de la
Vaudraye tearing up the letter. She said, simply:

“It shall be as you wish, my dear children. But don’t you think,
Guillaume, that there will be difficulties, that the law requires ...?

“Never mind the difficulties!” he cried. “We shall see to that later.
Everything will be settled as we intend, I am sure of it.”

A long silence followed, full of grave sweetness. At the end of it,
however, Guillaume, smitten with a vague remorse, murmured:

“And so, dearest, you will never know your name?”

She smiled:

“But I know my name: is it not Gilberte de la Vaudraye?”

“But your mother?”

“Oh, my mother!” she said, with shining eyes. “Mother’s name was mamma!”


THE END


Typographical errors corrected by the etext transcriber:

all this preamable=> all this preamble {pg 64}

brillant talker=> brilliant talker {pg 86}




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EYES OF INNOCENCE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


